Well, after all that. So, welcome to Psychology 230. Nice to see you all here. So, what I’m going to do today—how I’m going to start—is I’m going to give you an overview of the content of the course and then I’ll give you an overview of the class requirements right at the end. But I think we might as well jump right into the content to begin with. So, there’s a website—I don’t really like Blackboard so I have my own website. You can go to jordanbpeterson.com and underneath there there’s a menu that lists all the courses and the full syllabus is listed there. So, all the information that you’re going to need about the course can be found there, including most of the readings, although there is also a textbook, which I presume the majority of you have already purchased. So, it also lists the other things you need to know like what days the tests are going to be and what the assignments are and I’ll go over that anyways at the end of the class. So, but to begin with I’m going to tell you what the course is about so you can decide whether you’re in the right class or not. So, personality is a somewhat peculiar field of study in psychology because it spans a number of subdisciplines that aren’t particularly well suited to one another. So, for example, it spans clinical psychology and experimental psychology. And it also spans an approach that is associated fundamentally with single individuals with an approach that analyzes individual characteristics in large groups, which is generally what you have to do in experimental psychology. It’s also a relatively strange admixture of philosophy and, I would say engineering and medicine, as well as science. And you might think of medicine as a science but it’s not, and the reason that it’s not is because it’s concerned with the promotion of health and health is not a scientific category. It’s a category that can’t help but be value-laden because you have to decide what constitutes health and what constitutes illness, or what constitutes wellness and what constitutes pathology. And there’s no way you can do that without bringing value judgments into the equation. It’s particularly true in psychology because when you’re thinking about what a healthy personality might be, you generally don’t merely think in terms of the absence of pathology. You think in terms of the presence of positive traits, right, and someone who’s fully healthy mentally and physically. While the psychologists and especially the humanistic psychologists from the 60’s might consider someone who’s truly psychologically healthy self-actualized, which would mean in some sense that they’ve been able to develop the entirety of their positive potential, whatever that is. So because of these peculiarities, personality psychology the course, a course in personality psychology has to be pretty wide-ranging. And so this course is in fact wide-ranging. It brings in elements of cultural history, elements of moral philosophy, and then elements that I would consider are almost completely biological. And it does that in order to provide you with a multidimensional view of what it means to be a human being. I have some other principles that I abide by while I’m teaching this course as well and one of those is that I don’t really want to tell you about anything that I don’t you will find useful. And useful, like there’s a difference between a fact and a useful fact, right? There’s lots of facts, you can go on Google and you can drown yourself in facts—I’m sure you do that everyday. But a useful fact to me is one that transforms the way that you look at the world or the way that you act in the world in some manner that you find beneficial. And so another way of describing useful from that perspective is relevant. And so one of the principles I abide by is I don’t really want to teach you anything that isn’t relevant. And my criteria for relevant is, first: Is it going to make a difference to you personally. So are the things that you learn immediately meaningful to how you interact with the world? And then the second is: Is there some evidence that the facts that you’re going to be presented with actually have some social utility or some political utility or some economic utility? So that the fact that you know them makes a difference to the way that you act in a way that also affects the people around you. And so it’s for those multiple reasons that I brought together the material that I have brought together. Now that means that there are some factors that you have to take into account before you take this course. And there’s another personality course being given at exactly the same time, well I don’t—this semester anyways—and so it may be that that one is more suitable for you than this one. I don’t know, but I can tell you what this one is going to be like. And so if that isn’t what you want or if that’s not what you’re interested in then you probably shouldn’t take this course. So the first issue is that there’s a lot of reading. There isn’t as much reading as there used to be in this course, by the way, but there’s still a lot of reading and a lot of it’s original source material both from the personality theorists themselves and then also original source material from empirical papers. So I would say that not only is there a lot of reading, but the reading is actually quite difficult. I think it’s useful, given the way I already defined utility to you, and so I believe that reading what I present to you is going to be good for you, but if you don’t have time to do a lot of reading then you’re going to find this course frustrating. So, there’s also, because of the emphasis on clinical theoreticians which is a major part of personality theory—especially the more classical personality theory, which by the way is generally the elements of personality theory that most students are most interested in—there’s a lot of what I would consider philosophical material. And the reason it’s philosophical is because it’s concerned with how a person should live and that’s a much different question than what a person is. So it’s how a person should live or perhaps how a person might transform themselves or act in order to transform themselves so that there personality is, well for lack of a better term, better. Now, you can substitute healthier for better but in a context like the one we’re discussing the difference is trivial really. So, then the last thing that I would caution you against is that I don’t lecture from the reading material. So, often I’m not exactly sure even what I’m going to tell you when I come to class. I know the material, but I don’t what to stick to a prescribed outline; I want to talk to you about the things that I think are important. And so, with luck, that’ll make the lectures worth attending and worth listening to. But, if you’re more inclined from a temperamental perspective to want a course where things are laid out in a very orderly fashion and they progress in a linear fashion and it’s predictable and the lectures reflect the reading material, then this is not a good course for you. And so I would presume that would be the case if you’re orderly, and by the way, that’s one of the subdivisions of the Big Five Personality Trait Model, and orderly people tend to be conscientious. But they like things cut and dried and laid out in a linear fashion. I’m not that orderly; I’m higher in openness and openness is a creative dimension. And open people tend to use relatively loose associations when they speak and to cover a wide amount of territory. And, so, some people will like that. If you like reading literature, for example, you’d probably like this course. If you don’t, then you probably won’t. So, anyways, that’s pretty much enough for the warnings. So, now I’ll tell you what we’re going to talk about. One of the things that makes human beings unique is the fact that we’re self-conscious. Now, you’ll see ethologists, or people who study animal behavior, do relatively elementary tests of self-consciousness on animals. So, one of the most famous demonstrations of such self-consciousness is the mirror test. And so in the mirror test what you essentially do is you take an animals, maybe a chimp or maybe a three year old child, and you put a lipstick mark on their forehead or on their nose and then you show them a reflection of themselves in the mirror. And if they wipe off or gesture towards the lipstick mark then can make the presumption that they understand that it’s them that’s being reflected in the mirror, or at least they understand that well enough so that they can use the mirror as a guide to action with their hand or whatever it is that they happen to be pointing with and the reflection. Now, dolphins seem to be able to manage that, there’s some members of the corvid family, so those are basically crows and ravens—those things are really smart and they seem to possess rudimentary self-consciousness—I said dolphins, cetaceans in general, so whales—although I don’t know if all whales are self-conscious because it’s for example difficult to get a mirror big enough to show a blue whale—human beings, and that’s about it. Now, I don’t think that’s a very good definition of self-consciousness really, because the mere fact that you can recognize yourself, it’s also not fair to some animals like dogs, right, because dogs would need a smell mirror really, because, and most animals are very very smell predicated. Most of the brain is structured with the olfactory system as its core, unlike us really because our brains are structured with the visual system at the core and that makes us rather peculiar. So it’s a little unfair to animals like dogs or any rats that rely primarily on olfaction to orient themselves in the world. But the thing is I don’t think that’s really a very good definition of self-consciousness; it’s very rudimentary. You might say well that’s the first sort of step to being self-conscious because if you’re fully self-conscious I think you need to two more things. You need the capacity to imitate, which is a much more important capacity than people generally realize. In fact, I would say it’s of equivalent importance—it’s of equivalent importance to language. In fact, I’m not even sure that you can use language if you can’t imitate. First of all, obviously all the words you use are also the words that other people use. Otherwise, you’re not going to be very comprehensible. So, even the mere fact that you do speak means that you’re relying on imitation to get your point across. So, you need imitation and the reason you need imitation is because once you can imitate, you can use your body as a representational structure to represent the world and other people. You can even use your body as a representational structure to represent yourself, which you might do, for example, if you’re telling a joke at a dinner party and then you, you know, act out a self-parody and everyone laughs. So, and then with regards to language, well language obviously enables you to build sophisticated models of the world that are well-articulated, to exchange those with other people, and to think. Ok so, in order to be self-conscious you have to be able to recognize that you exist in this physical envelope, at least here and now; you need to be able to imitate, because that’s partly how you come to understand yourself and other creatures like you, which is a very important part of being self-conscious, right—I mean everything I learn about any of you is also going help me understand the sort of creature that I am, whether that’s for good or for evil—and then with language, well not only can we articulate our representations about others in the world, but we can also store those articulated representations over very very very very long spans of time. And we do that partly in ritual, which is the acting out of a representation, and we do that partly with regards to stories, which are in some sense an articulated representation of an acting out, right, because you can think of a story as a drama. So a drama is behavior representing behavior and then a story is an articulated representation of a drama. Now we have very old rituals and we have very very old stories. And so, part of what we do in this course is we go back to as close to the beginning as we can possibly manage to start to understand how people have understood themselves and represented themselves across the span of human history. And we’re doing that because we want to be able to put our current knowledge in some kind of historical context. And part of the reason for that is, well one of the things that characterizes a human personality is that it’s a historical phenomena. You know I’m sure you’ve heard in many classes that much of what makes up your personality is a cultural construct. Well, whether or not much of it is or not isn’t really the issue. Certainly some of it is, and an important part—you’re a cultural creature. And that means that you have emerged from a tradition that has been shaped in any number of ways by an extraordinary lengthy historical past—well historical and biological. And so what that means in part is that if you don’t understand your history, and that’s your history as it matters, not necessarily some collection of facts, then you don’t understand yourself. So, you know, human beings in their self-conscious form, we don’t really know how old we are. More or less biologically or genetically identical creatures to us existed at least 150 000 years ago but we seem to have discovered fire and were able to master it maybe 2 million years ago. You know and that requires a fair bit of intelligence. And there are artifacts that indicate a fairly high level of cultural capacity that are at least 50 000 years old. So, we can’t really say when we got fully self-conscious, and perhaps we might also say that we’re not even fully self-conscious yet because you know, really, what the hell do you know about yourself. You know, you’re really really really really complicated. And at best you have a partial model of who you are and that thing fails all the tail, which as you can tell because you’re always doing things that surprise you and often not in a particularly positive way. So, there’s no end of mystery. Anyways, the upshot of all of this is that we’re going to establish the context first that’s a historical context and I want to do that two ways. The first thing I want to do is to talk to you about mythological representations of personality. And that’s more important than you might think. In fact, it’s probably more important than you do think. By myth, what I mean is the representations of human beings in extremely long-lasting and persistent stories. And so some of those are the stories that are found in various religious traditions, but there’s oral traditions that surround those religious traditions, you know assuming that the religious traditions are written down; and there’s fairy tales and that sort of thing; and standard narratives that people used to guide themselves as the moved through the world. And most of the clinical theories that we’re going to discuss, so Freud’s theory and Jung’s theory and the theory of the Existentialists and the Phenomenologists and the Humanists and so forth, are variants of those mythological stories. Now, part of the reason for that is that Nietzsche said once that a philosopher was seldom anything other than the unconscious advocate of their cultural worldview. So, what he meant by that was you already come to the scene with a set of presuppositions. Now, some of those are embedded in your behavior. So, for example, when you walk—when you attend a funeral you know how to behavior. Generally, you’re quiet and solemn. You might not be able to explicate the rules a person should follow at a funeral, but you can do it. Now, you could perhaps articulate them if pressed, but it’s not like you’re following those rules when you go to a funeral; you just know what to do. If someone pressed you, you could turn it into a list of rules but it’s really more encoded in you’re actual behavior. You just automatically know what to do. You can tell, you know, whenever you interact with someone who’s really socially fluent, you can tell that they’re not consciously processing the way that they’re acting—otherwise they’re self-conscious and awkward. They’re very fluid. It’s automatized behavior and it’s coded right into them. So, if you’re a great philosopher, according to Nietzsche at least, what you do is you take a look at how you act and what you think and then you say “Well this is what it’s like.” It’s not so much that you’re inventing new ideas; it’s that you’re articulating the nature of structures that are already there. So, you can imagine, for example, imagine that you’re particularly interested in wolves. And so you go out and you study some wolves and one of the things you see is that the wolves have a dominance hierarchy. So, there’s a leader and then there is struggle in the pack to see who’s going to be the dominant leader. Now, there’s a couple problems with that which is that, you know if Wolf A and Wolf B fight and they’re pretty evenly matched and they tear each other to shreds, then Wolf C is going to come in and pound both of them and that’s not a particularly useful strategy for Wolf A or for Wolf B. Plus then the pack loses the power of Wolf A and Wolf B, so that’s hardly useful at all. So, what’s happened is that wolves have evolved dominance and submission strategies so that they can figure out who is going to lead and who is going to follow without having to engage in the kind of physical combat that’s going to result in damage. And so usually what happens is that two wolves face off—you’ve probably seen cats do this when they encounter each other you know out on the street—the first thing they do is sort of turn sideways and puff themselves up, right, and they dance back and forth; it’s quite comical. But what the cat’s trying to do is look big and it’s supposed to—it’s trying to make the other cat nervous enough to leave. And so what wolves do is roughly the same thing. They puff out so they look big and they make all sorts of ferocious noises and they threaten each other and usually what happens is one wolf will lose his nerve, flop down, roll over, and show his throat. And that basically means something like “I’m useless and, you know, and pathetic and you can tear up my throat if you want because of that,” and the other wolf thinks “Yeah, you are pretty useless and pathetic, but you know, we’re going to need you tomorrow to hunt down a deer, so you know, you can get up and protect your miserable self and that’ll be okay.” Now, if you were watching that, you might say, “Wolves follow rules,” but of course they don’t; that’s just how wolves act. When you describe what the wolves are doing then you turn it into a rule, but it wasn’t a rule to begin with; it was just a pattern of behavior. Now human beings are like that. We’re chalked full of patterns of behavior. And they’re the consequence of our biology, which is something we’ll talk about in depth in the last half and the course, and they’re a consequence of our culture. And they’re built into our bodies. Like every time you interact with another person, they’re telling you how to behave, right? “Don’t be too obtuse.” “Try to be a little bit witty.” “Have something interesting to say.” “Don’t be too annoying.” “If you’re going to say something funny make sure it’s funny.” “Take turns while you talk.” “Play nicely.” “Take your turn.” “Don’t eat all the bread.” Etc, etc. You know, and so if you don’t abide by those rules then people lift their eyebrow at you. Or they don’t smile at your jokes. Or they don’t look at you. Or they roll their eyes when you come in, which is really not a good sign by the way. And you get punished severely for it. And then if you do act like they would like you to act, you know, then people smile at you and they invite you to their place for dinner and, you know, maybe you have an intimate relationship and some people that like you. And so we’re exchanging information about how we should manifest ourselves in our bodies with every possible interaction. And what that means is that shapes the way that we act. Now, the problem is—or partly is—is that you don’t really understand the consequences of that. Like, you can act it out more or less depending on your social skill and the degree to which you’re been exposed to other people, but that doesn’t mean that you’re conscious—that you can consciously articulate all the rules that underlie that and if you think that maybe you can well fine. You know, imagine a well-behaved four-year-old. You know, by four, you’ve got a lot of the social rules down because by four you can play with others. If you’re ever going to be able to you can already do it by the time you’re four. If you can’t by the time you’re four you are in serious trouble because other kids won’t play with you and then they won’t teach you how to act and then you stay immature and isolated and, you know, off in you’re little corner dejected and bitter for the rest of your life. Now, you know, you might that that’s a little rough but it’s not; that’s what the data indicate. So, anyways, what this means in part is, well, we’ve been shaping how all of us behave as long as we’ve been social. Now you might say “Well how long have we been social?” Well, crustaceans are social. So, lobsters, for example, organize themselves into dominance hierarchies and they modify each others’ behavior. And that’s 400 million years. So, we’ve been social and living in groups since our ancestors departed on the evolutionary timescale from the ancestors of lobsters. So, that’s a very very very long time. There weren’t any trees around back then. So, social life is older than trees. So, you can be sure that you’re adapted to it in a major way. So, it’s built into your biology but then there’s the historic element of it too. And it’s quite—we’re quite flexible from a cultural perspective. So, there’s an example: this guy named Robert Sapolski, who I really like; he’s a great scientist. He went off to Africa to study baboons. And baboons are not pleasant, generally speaking. They fight a lot; they’re bullies. They bite. They can really bite. A baboon, like a predatory cat will think twice about taking on a baboon. They’ve got major teeth and their temperament is not particularly positive. Sapolski went and studied a group of baboons and they were engaged in typical baboon behavior, grasping each other all the time and bullying each other. And they were all stressed out because—Sapolski knew that because he measured their levels of stress and testosterone and so forth. And so it was a pretty miserable baboon existence, but then what happened was that the baboons went to feed somewhere that I don’t remember and they—a lot of them contracted tuberculosis. And it turned out that almost all the hyper aggressive males got tuberculosis and died and all that was left was the beta males, roughly speaking. And then the whole baboon culture transformed so that it because much more agreeable and much more cooperative. And then when aggressive baboons would move into that territory, you know singly, on their own, then they’d get all placid and calm too. So, it’s interesting because obviously baboons aren’t social to the degree we are but it does indicate that even at the advanced primate level—you know their brains are pretty big but not as big as ours—that cultural transmission of behavior expectation can be quite powerful and it can transform quite rapidly. So, anyways we’ve been shaping each others’ behavior for a very very very very long time. And a lot of that’s encoding deeply in biology and in culture. Now biologically, and we’ll talk about this a lot when we get to the biological section, one of the ways you can know how social you are is by how hurt and ashamed you get when you make a serious social error. You know, so if you’re at a party and you make a fool of yourself, you know, depending on your level of neuroticism—which is also a Big Five Trait that indexes how sensitive you are to negative emotion—you might obsess about what an idiot you are for the next three or four months, or maybe even for the next five years. You know, people do not like social exclusion. You know, and you have a little counter that’s more or less built into the back of your brain that roughly, first of all it estimates how successful you are—there’s an estimation that actually seems to occur right at birth where when part of your neuroticism levels are set. And then that can be modified to some degree by learning. You know, and if you’re a top baboon, well you’re going to experience less negative emotion and more satisfaction than you are if you’re a bottom baboon and it’s exactly the same with people. So, you know, we like to be climbing up dominance hierarchies and we like to be near the top of dominance hierarchies. And if the little counter at the back of your brain notices that, you know, you’re doing a good job of climbing towards the top of relevant dominance hierarchy then its going to produce more serotonin and you’re not going to be in as much pain, you’re not going to be as depressed, you’re not going to be as anxious, you’re not going to be stressed, and so forth. So there’s a biological basis for our social being and it’s extraordinarily important to us how we fit into social groups. Ok, so we’ve also been trying to figure out what the hell we are, who we are, for thousands and thousands of years, partly as a consequence of imitation, you know, because I can act you out and that’ll sort of help me understand what you’re like; and partly as a consequence of articulated communication. A lot of that’s storytelling. Now people have been telling stories for we have no idea how long. I mean, if you go and visit peoples that have no written language and who have been isolated from the rest of human society for let’s say tens of thousands of years—and such people still exist—you find that they tell stories, they dance, they act each other out, you know. So, we know certainly that the propensity to tell stories and to engage in ritual behavior is far older than our ability to write. I suspect you can push it back at least 50 000 years, although I suspect it’s a lot older than that. And so, what’s happened is that across those timescales, we’ve started to tell stories about one another that represent how we act. And then you might think well some of those stories are interesting and memorable and some of them aren’t and then we tend to remember the interesting and memorable ones and pass them on. And so you can also imagine human beings aggregating together in groups of thousands and thousands of people over thousands and thousands of years telling their stories to one another and hammering those stories into some sort of mutually acceptable and comprehensible form. And so, for example one example of that is that if you look at the creation stories—the creation story that say occurs in Genesis in the Old Testament—it’s a member of a class of creation stories that characterized Middle Eastern mythology and it seems to have arisen out of the organization of separate Middle Eastern tribes thousands and thousands of years ago, each with their own traditions, into a relatively homogenous story that characterized a large group of people’s central beliefs. So, we have information about how we act from the representations that we’ve made of those actions that we’ve passed forward and a lot of those take the form of myths—religious stories. And, so, part of what we’re going to do is we’re going to begin the course with two foundation-establishing themes. One has to do with the structure of mythological representations and the second has to do with a set of rituals and processes and beliefs that have been identified more or less worldwide that have to do with shamanic transformation. Now, the title of this course is “Personality and its Transformations,” and the reason it’s titled that way is because you aren’t just who you are. You’re also something that changes all the time. You’re more like a river than like a rock. You’re constantly transforming. What’s the name of? The physicist Erwin Schrödinger thought that people were dissipative structures. It’s a very interesting idea. So, a dissipative structure is a structure that maintains its structural integrity while its elements transform completely. So you know when you let the water out of a sink you get a whirlpool, right? And the whirlpool is a fairly stable entity, but the water that the whirlpool is made of is constantly changing. That’s a dissipative structure. Well, that’s what you’re like. You maintain your form across time but your elements are constantly transforming. And people are very very transformative creatures. You know, we can, unlike animals really because animals are sort of what they are and that’s it. I mean they have some capacity to learn but not much. Your typical beaver is acting more or less today like, you know, his great great great great grandfather was acting 5000 years ago. There’s no real accretion of culture, whereas with human being, we transform like mad. I mean we do that culturally, things aren’t much—there’s so many things, for example, that are different now than there were twenty years ago that it’s almost impossible to imagine. And then, so we transform on a cultural scale quite rapidly but we also do that individually. I mean you guys have all just made the transition to university, just roughly speaking. You know, I’m sure that you’re like you were in some ways when you were at high school, but well hopefully you’re better than you were in high school a whole bunch of ways as well. You should be more mature but your personality may have transformed substantially. You know, and with any luck you’re not done with your sequences of transformations. You know, that’s going to be something that characterizes you for the rest of your life insofar as you’re a dynamic person, your eyes are open, you pay attention, and you can learn. And so one of the things you might say is that the most stable thing there is about you in personality is its capacity to transform. And that’s really something that’s worth knowing, you know, because one of the things I can tell you about the great myths of mankind—there’s lots of them and they have different themes—but one of the most powerful themes is the way you get yourself out of trouble is to transform your personality. Now you think, you kind of do that every time you learn something, right, because you learn something and you’re a little different than you were before. Hopefully different in a significant way and hopefully different in a way that helps you solve problems that you couldn’t solve before. So, you could say that one of the leitmotifs of being human is, “well if I encounter an obstacle I can just transform and I can figure out some way of getting around it,” and that’s something that makes us quite remarkable. Now, and one of the things that I could suggest to you, and I think this is one of the largest ideas that exist—especially communicable in this short of time—is that it’s much better to identify with your capacity to transform than it is to identify with who you are now. And that can get you out of an awful lot of trouble. I mean one of the things that characterizes ideologues, for example, or people who are trapped in fixed belief systems is that they worship who they are now. And that’d be all fine if everything was going a hundred percent for them but it’s seldom the case. And so, unless you’re life is perfect—and that seems highly improbable—maybe if you were someone else it would be better. And you know, that’s all you’ve got in some sense because changing the world in some way that’s going to make you feel better about it, well you know, you might be able to do that in some small way but the probability that you could or should try to do that on a large scale is—it’s pretty low. So, in the mythological representation section I’m going to talk to you about the fundamental elements of narrative. And the reason that I think that that’s necessary is because there’s sort of two things that you have to consider when you’re talking about people and one is: objectively, what is a person like? The same way you might think about what a rat is like or maybe even what a rock is like. So, that’s a scientific question in some sense. But then there’s another question which—or maybe two questions: how do people act and how should they act? And maybe the first one is a scientific question but the second one certainly isn’t. And the way that we explore how people do act and how they should act has a lot more to do with narrative than to do with science. And you know, you know this; all you have to do is think about it. You know, you think about where do you get most of your information about what people are like when you’re not actually just interacting with some people. And the answer to that is quite straightforward: you read novels, you read literature, you go see movies, you watch Game of Thrones, you binge on Game of Thrones you know, you go watch Star Wars, you know maybe you line up for three days if you’re completely insane to go see Star Wars. You know and you might ask, “Well, what in the world are you doing?” Well, people are hungry for information about how people do act and how they should act. And we’re absolutely compelled by narratives. And there’s a reason for that. Well, and you kind of know what a narrative is and what one isn’t, right? You go to a movie and you think, “Ah, the character development’s pretty good but, you know, as a story it was terrible.” And then maybe you talk to your friends about why it was a terrible story but the funny thing is you kind of know, right? It’s like, some things are stories and some things aren’t and laying out what actually makes something a story, that’s very difficult. But you still know it and you can have some consensus even. You know, if you look on IMDB or Rotten Tomatoes, you know, people form large-group consensus about what constitutes an acceptable narrative pretty damn quickly. And there seems to be at least a certain amount of agreement, you know, barring individual differences. So, the mythological and the shamanic discussions that we’re going to undertake have a couple of purposes and one is to provide you with the foundations of a language that you can use to understand narrative. And that’s going to prove very very useful because most of the clinical theories that we’re going to talk about are really narrative based. And once you understand their mythological substructure so to speak, it gives you a framework within which you can slot the theories. You know, because one of the things that’s complicated about personality theory is that there are a lot of personality theories. And you might think, “Well, how the hell can that be?” Because if it’s a theory, theoretically there can only be one. Like, there’s only one Theory of Relativity, roughly speaking, because it’s a little fuzzy around the edges but people agree on the core elements. While with personality theory, there’s many many different personality theories. And, so, then you might think, “Well, how are you supposed to make any sense out of that?” And well there’s two ways. One is to put of all of them into a more fundamental underlying structure, and that’s something that I’m really going to strive to have you guys do while you’re taking this course. And the other is to actually adopt a slightly different set of presuppositions about personality theories. And so you can say, “Well, there’s only one Theory of Relativity,” but then you might say, “Well yeah, there’s only one Theory of Relativity but then consider a toolbox.” So maybe some of you are relatively handy and you have a toolbox. What’s in a toolbox? Hammers—or a hammer—saws, wrenches, pliers, vise grips, etc. You know and you might say, “Well, they’re tools. Why do you need all those tools?” And the answer is well, you can hammer a nail in with a wrench but it’d be a lot better if you could use a hammer and you can probably bang a bolt off with a hammer but it would be a lot better if you have a wrench. And, so, then you might think, “Well, if you’re trying to do something complicated and sophisticated, why not have a bunch of tools?” Now, we don’t generally think of scientific theories as tools, although that is what they are. Above all else, they’re tools. And then when we’re dealing with something as complicated as a human being, well we may need more than one tool to get to the bottom of it. And it’s also the case, you know, that to say understand a human being, well that’s a complicated thing. It’s like—because you might say, “Understand to what end?” You don’t mean comprehensive, universal, omniscient understanding. Obviously, you mean, “I want to know X about someone because I have some desire in relationship to my interactions with them.” And so, there’s all sorts of tools that can facilitate that. So what I would say is that, you know, Freud’s a microscope and Jung is a telescope; that’s one way of thinking about it. I mean there’s no particular reason I associated either of those with those two tools, but the point is is that if paid careful attention to personality theories they can expand your capacity to represent yourself in ways that’s extremely useful. Because, you know, you should understand who you are and why, and what implications that has for you. Because you’re a transformable creature but you also have a fairly stable underlying substructure, right? Otherwise you’d just melt like an octopus. So, you’re this weird dynamic combination of relatively permanent structure and then embedded capacity to transform. You have a nature and so understanding your nature is extraordinarily worthwhile. And so hopefully what we’re going to do during this course is give you a whole bunch of tools to understand yourself and other people with. Tools that will really be useful; things you can use day to day to understand yourselves and your families and so on and to improve your future—with any luck. And then also cover the elements of you that are stable, most of which I would say have been discovered—at least in the more objective sense—by biological psychologists. So, mostly animal researchers peculiarly enough. Okay, so mythological representations—we’re going to take a trip back through time. We’re going to look at archaic and ancient stories of mankind told by members of our species to each other. And I’m going to concentrate on stories that have lasted—we don’t know how long. You know, we have stories that in the written form are 4000 years old, but all the evidence suggests that those stories are based on traditions that go back far far beyond that; at least 50 000 years—and maybe way before that. So we’ll take a look at those and that will give us a foundation that we can use to build on. And then we’re going to look at shamanic rituals and descriptions to get some sense of the archetype of transformation, which sort of means, well, what is it that you have to undergo when you’re changing and what are you likely to experience when that happens? Now I can give you a bit of a preview: um, it’s not always the case—maybe it’s seldom the case—that if you learn something important that it’s pleasant. You know, this happens to people all the time. So maybe, I don’t know, maybe you had a recent relationship that went seriously sour. And you know maybe it was because you were going out with a jerk or maybe it’s because you’re just not very sophisticated. And no doubt you’re trying to figure out which of those happens to be true while you’re, you know, considering the relationship. But generally what happens to people when they’re moving towards something and the bottom falls out, because something occurs that they didn’t understand and couldn’t predict, maybe in their own behavior—maybe you had an affair while you were in your relationship and you didn’t expect that—well, what happens is your current model of yourself, and perhaps even of the world, is demonstrated as insufficient. And that rattles you up badly. And then you’re rattled up for some good length of time—not very motivated, somewhat depressed, fairly anxious, you sort of fell apart, you don’t know which way is up. And then maybe if you’re lucky you think about it and talk about it and put yourself back together. And when you come out the other side you’re a little smarter and a little more together than you were to begin with. Now, if you’re unlucky, you just stay in the little pit for—people can stay in the little pit for a very very long time and that’s not so good. And so, you know, the process of transforming is actually quite dangerous because it doesn’t necessarily have to be completed in a successful manner. But it does have a pattern and the pattern usually is you think you know what you’re doing and then something happens to demonstrate that you actually don’t know what you’re doing. And that puts you in a spin. And then through careful analysis and support and discussion—and other processes that we don’t really understand very well—you come to incorporate the anomalous knowledge that knocked you on your back, you reconstruct your personality and your representations of the world, and then you move ahead, hopefully, more than you were before. But it’s an interesting thing to know, you know. One of the things Nietzsche said, again was that you could—you could tell the character of a human being by how much truth they’re willing to tolerate. Now that’s an interesting phrase, eh, because you generally think of people, because they’re optimistic, they generally think of truth as something positive; obviously it’s better to know the truth. It’s like, no, if you pull the wool over your eyes as a general rule learning the truth is not a pleasant experience. That doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s something—not something you should do, but the idea that the path to enlightenment is blissful: that’s not a very smart idea. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. So, the shamanic rituals basically manifest in an archetypal way. So, one of the things you see happening with the typical—the shaman, by the way shamanism is a worldwide phenomena and it seems to be associated with primordial or archaic psychology of transformation. It’s often drug-aided. And generally what happens is that the shamanic transformation is accompanied by the descent into something approximating psychological death and then a rebuilding and a rebirth that puts the person out on the other side. It’s like an initiation ritual and that’s another way of thinking about it. Or you might think about it as the depressing that possessed you during your first semester of university which either knocked you out of the university altogether—because that happens to a lot of people—or which you recovered from and finally became a university student, although perhaps that wasn’t a particularly pleasant transition. You know, we’ve done some testing with U of T students and it’s interesting to note that about a third of you meet criteria for clinical depression your first year here. Now what that indicates to me is that the criteria for clinical depression are a little on the sensitive side, but regardless—because if a third of people meet the criteria you think, “Yeah, well that’s a little sensitive.” But by the same token, you know, it’s not an easy adjustment and the old you has die. And generally that’s not very pleasant. So, and it’s a good way to think about the impediments to learning because you hardly ever learn something without having part of you die first. And that’s part of the reason that people are rather resistant to learning anything new that’s important. Okay, well so you’ve got that. Now, after that we’re going to talk about Piaget. And Piaget isn’t necessarily known as a personality psychologist but that’s okay. Piaget published a very—he was a developmental psychologist, maybe the greatest developmental psychologist. He published a very large number of books—many of which haven’t even been translated yet, some of which haven’t even been published yet. So, Piaget thought a lot of things about a lot of things. And he’s generally known for his stage theory of developmental but he really wasn’t all that into that stage theory. It just seemed to be the part of his theory that I would say rather dimwitted Western intellectuals could grasp onto most easily and so that’s generally what you hear about. But Piaget was a very very sophisticated thinker. And one of the things he was interested in was, well he was interested in how the child in some sense boots itself up. That’s a reasonable way of thinking about it, because you know when you turn on a computer, what happens is a certain number of primitive functions—primitive fundamental functions—come online first. And then those functions enable more complex functions to emerge. And then those functions enable more complex functions to emerge. And soon there your computer is, waiting for you. And human beings are kind of like that. So when we’re first born—we’re very primitive when we’re first born. We’re very immature; that’s a better way of thinking about it. We’re not precisely primitive; we still have very large brains and there are more connections in those brains at birth than there will be for the rest of your life, which is quite interesting. You actually die into your personality. Because what happens isn’t so much that you make new connections; it’s that a whole bunch of the ones you already have that you don’t use disappear. So that’s pretty peculiar. Anyways, when you’re first born there’s not a lot to you in terms of capacity to engage with the world. Your moth is pretty wired up, your lips and your tongue—which is a good thing because you have to breastfeed and that’s actually not very simple. You have to have a clue to do that and it’s the first complex social interaction that you’re likely to engage in. So, you—you’re born with a bit of a priori sophisticated wiring already in place, but the rest of you, man, it’s not there much at all. You can’t control your arms; you know if you watch a baby in a crib—a young baby—and it’s not swaddled up, you know their arms sort of float around in space and so do their legs. And now and then they might hit themselves and generally that seems to come as quite a shock to the baby. It’s not—its peripheral nervous system, the peripheral elements of its central nervous system are not well developed at birth. And so it’s almost as if the baby has to discover its limbs—it sort of expands from the middle outwards—it has to discover its limbs and then start to figure out what to do with them. And so what Piaget attempted to do was to lay out the processes by which a child unfolded into the world. Now, some of—there’s a biological basis to that because you come into the world at birth with a set of reflexes at hand. And those reflexes are enough to get you started. And so Piaget—here’s one way of trying to understand Piaget. I like it quite a bit. It’s a bit of an oversimplification but it’ll do. There’s lots of different ways of thinking about what the world is made of. Now, you know, if you’re classically—if you’re a classical scientist—you tend to think that the world’s made out of matter. You know and then matter is made out of atoms and then atoms are made of—god only knows what atoms are made out of, right, because by the time you get under atoms you just have no idea what’s going on down there. But, you know, we generally don’t think about that too much and we sort of assume Newtonian reality and that everything is made out of hard little particles like dust and that’s the scientific model. But there’s other ways of looking at the world that are not only equally valid but equally necessary and equally powerful. One of them is that you can look at the world as a matrix of information. You know, and so information generally has significance and meaning—at least insofar as information is conceptualized by human beings. And so, for example, if you’re ten years old and you’re crawling around on the floor and the dog has a ball and you grab it and the dog nips you, that’s informative. And so, what Piaget claims is that children come into the world with an information-seeking structure and that as they interact with the world phenomena emerge that they can model with their bodies. So, for example, if I’m going to drink this then I have to model it with my hand before I can do so. And so it turns out, for example, when if this thing’s sitting here—especially if I’m thirsty—and I look at it my eyes tell my hands to get ready to grab it. And so when you say you understand something what you mean is that—part of what you mean—is that when you perceive it, it maps itself onto your body. And so this happens at pretty low levels of your nervous system. So, for example, there are people who are blind. They say they’re blind; they can’t see anything. But if you move your hands up like this and ask them to guess which hand you’re lifting they can do it with almost a hundred percent accuracy. And you think, “Well how the hell can that possibly be? They’re blind!” Well, the reason that happens is because your eyes are detecting patterns in the world, some of those patterns you perceive as conscious reality, but other patterns are just mapped onto your spine or onto your emotional system. Doesn’t—you don’t need the perception of the object in order to have that activated. Because, you know, you probably think, “There’s the world,” you see it, you think about it, you evaluate it, and you act. It’s like, that isn’t how it works. It’s very seldomly how it works. Partly because it’s just too damn slow. You know, if you had to think about everything you’d be running over pedestrians nonstop, right? You have to be able to react very very quickly and part of the way you do that is by having your sensory systems map right onto your motor output systems. So, Piaget. Well, for Piaget, part of the way that the personality emerges out of the doldrums of infancy is that the child encounters the world and incorporates the information that they gather as a consequence of bumping up against it. And, then, they build themselves in some sense from their bodies and the ability—the abilities that they’re practicing with their bodies like the gripping mechanism and the pointing mechanism and the scratching mechanism and all those things that they can build—they build those up to the point where the can start to use abstractions. And so the baby sort of spirals out of nowhere using its exploratory capacity, absorbing information from the world, and creates its personality that way. It’s a lovely model and we’ll cover that in some detail. The depth psychologists. I concentrate primarily on Jung and Freud. And you know if you take a personality course, generally you’ll be introduced to Freud first and then you’ll be introduced to Jung and maybe Adler and some of the neo-Freudians, more or less as afterthoughts to Freud. But I don’t really think that’s appropriate. First of all, I think you can make a strong case that Jung was—that the utility of Jung’s theory is particularly evident when you’re talking about radical similarities between people. So, Jung was very biologically orientated. In some ways he was way ahead of biological psychiatrists and psychologists because when Jung was beginning to formulate his theories, in the West—in North America anyways and in the United States—most of the people who were studying human beings were behaviorists. And behaviorists basically presume that you were a blank slate at birth and that you learned how to do everything that you know how to do. Well, that’s not true at all. First of all, you can’t learn everything that you know how to do because you have to know something to start the whole process off, and second, you know, you don’t have to learn really to understand what a dog’s growl means. You know it’s kind of wired into you. And you really don’t have to learn to be afraid of the dark, man. You’ve got that down by the time you’re about three. You know, so there’s lots of things that are built right into people and what exactly that means we’re not sure about. I mean it does look, for example, like snake phobia is innate and even if the actual phobia isn’t innate—and it probably is—you can learn to be phobic of snakes in no time flat, whereas like trying to become phobic of pistols is very very difficult. Now, Jung was very interested in the—I think what the best way to think about it is the substrata of human cognition. You know, because human beings are a particular type of thing. It’s not like our souls are disconnected from our bodies and that our knowledge is somehow appropriate or universal in some way that would make sense if we didn’t have bodies. We’re not like that at all. We’re in our bodies. Our brains are adapted to our bodies. Our minds are adapted to our bodies and so is our knowledge. And that means that our cognitive abilities—our theories of the world—have biological substructures and those are presuppositions in some sense for our knowledge that we don’t have to learn. So, for example, you don’t really have to learn that being punched hurts; you just discover that. You don’t really have to learn what a smile means. You don’t really have to learn what anger means. You know, you’ll experience it. So it’s right in you. You watch little kids, little babies—when they’re crying they’re often angry. So, for example, by nine months of age a baby can more or less identify its mother. So, someone walks into the baby’s room and takes a look at the baby and it’s not the baby’s mother and the baby starts crying and you think, “Oh, poor baby.” It’s like, fair enough, that baby is not sad; that baby is angry. And you can tell if you look at the baby because it’s turning all red and that’s what people do when they cry when they’re angry. And so it’s a good thing to know when you’re arguing with someone and they get upset and maybe they start to cry. You think, “Oh, the poor person,” but then if you look you’ll see that they’re all red. And that means that they’d like to strangle you but their, you know, their social niceties is hopefully preventing them. So, and that can certainly change your attitude towards whether or not you should be feeling sorry for them when they hurt their feelings. So, there’s all sorts of things that are universal about human beings and Jung was very very interested in what those universals are and how they played out in patterns of behavior. So, you can imagine—you can imagine that you have an instinct, say like anger. And thinking about it that way, it’s like a cross-section: that’s person’s angry. You know, and you can imagine the facial configuration that would go along with that. But in a more sophisticated way if you wanted to represent anger maybe you’d represent it like a drama—like a story. You know, and that’s actually what you want to know if someone gets angry, right? “What happened?” Well, imagine if you took a thousand stories about angry people and you boiled them all into one story so that everything that was common about all the stories about anger were encapsulated in a single story. Well, that would be the archetypal story of anger. And everyone would recognize it because it’s like anger represented like a movie in some sense in it’s purest form. Well that’s an archetype and that’s the sort of thing that Jung was extraordinarily interested in—understanding and documenting. And it’s a tremendous amount of fun. So one of the things we’ll do is I’m going to show you some movies—probably the Lion King, at least parts of it—and I’m going to show you how the archetypal structure manifests itself. And that’s really worth knowing. It’s kind of a pain because then from now on you’ll go to movies and you’ll think, “Oh well, that’s that archetypal structure,” and “That’s what that symbol means,” and you’ll really be annoying to your friends. But it’s very entertaining and it’s very illuminating. And partly because what’s really cool about these archetypal story structures is not only do they tell you who they are but they tell you in some sense who you should be. Now, that’s cool, because one of the things that modern people have a real problem with is trying to understand whether or not life has any meaning, you know. We look at the world from a scientific perspective and we say, “Well, it appears that all this is, you know, without meaning; it doesn’t mean anything with any cosmic sense.” It’s a pretty dopey conclusion as far as I’m concerned because the originators of the scientific method excluded subjective meaning from the doctrine at the outset. So, you know, if you look at the world scientifically and you say, “Well, it’s without subjective meaning,” it’s like, “Well, yeah, obviously,” because science was set up so that all the subjective meaning would be stripped away from the phenomena. So, you know, it’s not something to be really shocked about afterwards and it also doesn’t mean that there’s no such thing as subjective meaning. It just means that it’s very difficult to get a grip on from a purely scientific perspective. And one of the lovely things about archetypal stories is they tell you in a way that’s universally believable who you are. And that’s very cool. And, you know, because you think—you learn this in university too and it just tears me up, you know. You learn implicitly or explicitly in almost all of the fields of study that you’re going to undertake—especially on the humanities end—that morality is relative and that there’s no ultimate meaning, which is a really rotten thing to be teaching people of your age. You know, because you’re too damn young to be nihilistic. You know, you can be nihilistic when you’re 85—you’re all done by then—but to be nihilistic now that’s a bloody catastrophe. You know, and it’s completely pointless because the notion of—the notion that things are meaningless in some ultimate sense: it’s an extraordinarily primitive philosophical theory. And it does not serve people well. It makes them sick. And so one of the things that you might consider is that if your stupid theory makes you sick maybe there’s something wrong with it. It might be a criteria for the utility—or perhaps even the truth of the theory, you know. Depends on how you think about these things. You know, you might say, “Well, if a truth makes you sick that doesn’t mean it’s any less of a truth.” Well, maybe. Maybe it really does mean that it’s much much less of a truth. It depends to some degree what you mean by truth. So, anyways, Jung’s very very very very useful for that. He’s a terrifying thinker. Really, like I read—when I was about 23 or 24 I spent two years and I read pretty much about everything Jung wrote; it’s about twenty-three volumes. And it just blew me into bits. I had no idea what the hell was going on—my dreams changed. Really, it was really rough. I was reading Nietzsche at the same time and he’s just about as bad. Like Nietzsche said he philosophized with a hammer. You know, and that’s great unless he’s taking a hammer to your skull and that’s not nearly so pleasant. So, you know, Jung—he’s a completely different sort of creature and I think that’s part of the reason that you never really learn about him in university. You know, if you don’t understand him he looks weird, and if you do understand him a little bit he’s terrifying and you’re bloody well going to stop. You’ll think, “Ah, no that’s okay. I don’t—I don’t really need to know that.” So, Freud. Freud’s a nice whipping boy for psychologists, which I also think is pretty pathetic because ungrateful to begin with. You know, Freud was really the person who formalized the idea of the unconscious. You know, and everyone takes that for granted, that there’s a cognitive unconscious. That’s what the psychologists discovered in what, the 1980’s. “There’s a cognitive unconscious.” It’s like, “Yeah, good work guys. They’d figured that out back in 1910.” You know, but you don’t see credit being given to Freud for making that sort of discovery if you look at experimental psychology, which I think—like I said—I think that’s really ungrateful. Freud’s a strange guy. And, you know, you can take issue with—especially the details of his theory. You know, like the Oedipal complex, for example, or penis envy, those sorts of things. It’s like, you know, in some ways they seem laughably anachronistic, but you know sometimes someone can be wrong in the details and right in the overall conception. You know, because theories are multilayered things, right? So, sometimes I read a student essay, you know, and the sentences are just awful. This person, like God only knows where they learned to write—probably in a high school somewhere. And, you know, it’s incomprehensible, but if you read the whole thing you think, “Man, there’s an idea in here.” You know, the person is smarter than their ability to write. And so then you can write—you can say, “Look, you can’t write worth a damn but, you know, you’re pretty smart and you’ve got some ideas in here that if you could articulate might be of really high quality.” So, you can be wrong in the details and right in the overall picture and Freud was like that all the time. And Freud was also unbeatable in relationship to familial pathology. So, from Freud’s perspective, the fundamental task of the emerging human being was to extricate themselves from their family. Now, you might think, “Well why is that such a problem?” Well, here’s a couple of reasons. Well, first, your parents take care of you so like maybe you don’t want to dispense with that too early, especially if they really really take care of you. And that’s the Oedipal situation from the Freudian perspective. It’s like, the Oedipal’s situation arises when you have a parent—or two parents—who do so much for you that you’re no longer able to do anything for yourself. And that is not a good situation; it’s extraordinarily pathological. And there is nobody like Freud who lays out the details of that pathology. And we’re going to watch a movie, “Crumb” it’s called, which is a very disturbing movie—which I suppose is a trigger warning for those of you who think you need trigger warnings. It’s a very very distressing documentary but it will show you Freudian psychopathology like you’ve never seen it—unless you happen to live in a thoroughly Oedipal family. Alright. So, look, I didn’t get through the whole outline. I’ll tell you very briefly what you’re going to be required to do and then we’ll continue this is the next lecture. So, there’s three exams: two midterms and a final. They’re multiple choice. Okay, I’ll post some of the questions before the exam so that you know what you’re getting into. I don’t think they’re particularly difficult; some of you will beg to differ. There’s pressure on us this year to curve the grades so beware. I may have to do that okay just—and you need to know that. You have to write an essay: 750 words. That’s not a very long essay but that makes it actually more difficult. The sign-up for the topics of the essay are on the website. You can just go there and sign up. There’s twenty different topics and there’s fifteen slots for each topic so I would recommend that you do that quite quickly. You have to do a personality self-analysis: 7.5 percent of your grade. The link to that is online too. You can get started on that whenever you want. Your TA—one of them—that’s Christine Brophy; she’s over there in the corner patiently waiting for me to introduce her. She has office hours; they’re posted online. You can sign up for her office hours online. You can also sign up for my office hours online. So, well that’s halfway through what the course is going to be about. So, we’ll see you on Thursday.
I talked a little bit last time about what we were going to cover but we didn’t get quite through it so I’m going to finish that. For those of you who weren’t here last time you can watch the lecture because it’s online. So, we stopped at the depth psychologists, really, and those are the psychoanalysts. And psychoanalysts are people who are concerned with—well, for a psychoanalyst, roughly speaking, you’re a collection of loosely integrated spirits. That’s one way of thinking about it—or sub personalities. You’re not a unity. And those subpersonalities have their basis in, well in all sorts of things. They might have their basis in past especially traumatic experience or in patterns of socialization that characterized your family, but they might also have their basis in fundamental biological motivational systems. So, for example, a psychoanalyst would contextualize anger, or perhaps sexual attraction, as a subpersonality. And the reason for that is that—well you know what it’s like when you get angry. You get angry at someone you love and you know, first of all, you know, and it’s some level you’re wishing harm. Now, that might only be that you want to win the argument and you want them to be nicely crushed while you do it, but so there’s a desire that comes along with the anger. But there’s a lot of other things that happen too. So, for example, if someone’s annoying you, even if you love them, the probability that at that moment you’re going to be able to easily access all the memories you have about how annoying they are and have difficult time accessing the memories about how wonderful they’ve been to you is quite high. You know and you know that because sometimes you get angry with someone and you have an argument with them and you sort of clue in later, you snap out of your more or less possessed state and you think, “Yeah, well you know, I really wasn’t taking the context into mind and I was kind of harsh.” So, well so and so then you think, “Well, who’s in control.” And that’s the question the psychoanalysts are really interested in and their answer is it’s not generally you. And so it’s very terrifying reading in some sense because, you know, people like to think of themselves as masters of their own house so to speak and it’s just, it’s only vaguely true. And, you know, people—you know that too because you make maybe New Year’s Eve—ah, what do you call those?—resolutions. How you’re going to be a better person. I think the most common ones is man, you’re going to hit the gym three times a week. It’s like, “No, you’re not actually!” And so very few people do and that’s partly because, well it’s hard and so you don’t want to do hard things. And the reason for that is because they’re hard, so it doesn’t take much explanation. But it’s also because you can’t just tell yourself what to do. And that’s annoying too because life would be a lot easier if you could just say, “Okay, well you know, sit down, study for two hours, don’t watch cats on YouTube—or whatever it is that you’re watching.” And no, no, no, that isn’t what happens. You sit there and you study for a while and then, you know, you’re thinking about cats and the next thing you know you’re watching haunted mansions in London or some damn thing. You know, so and it’s a scary idea in some sense because if you think well, if you’re not really master of your own house, you know if you don’t know yourself under full voluntary control—and you certainly don’t—then what does? And you know Freud is interesting in that regard because he really talked about the motive powerful of fundamental motivational systems. Mostly for Freud it was aggression and sexuality. And you know those are—those are big motivators; let’s make no mistake about it. And so he thought of you as—that the conscious part of your personality maybe as the—it’s like the caption of a ship with a very unruly crew. It’s a nice metaphor because of course the ship’s on the ocean and the oceans can be very stormy. And so you can only sort of plot your course and you have to work with what’s thrown at you. And then the unruly crew is—well, it’s all your drives. Drives is the wrong way of thinking about it. I like the psychoanalytic notion of subpersonality because a subpersonality has a viewpoint, there’s things it wants, and it plans. So it’s a living entity; it’s not some dead cognitive system, you know. So Freud was interested in some sense more about, I would say, the biological underpinnings of the subpersonalities, you know. Because he was quite biologically oriented and he realized that sexuality and aggression were very fundamental subpersonalities. And then there’s Jung and Jung is much more terrifying than Freud, which is really saying a lot because Freud’s quite terrifying. But Jung, he’s just terrifying beyond belief. And, you know, for Jung the subpersonalities that make you up are thousands and thousands of years old. They’re cultural constructions that are thousands and thousands of years old and they have you in their grip. So, for Jung, for example, one of the things he said and I don’t remember where it was—I love this phrasing, it’s so true. And you can think about this for like five years and you can still think about it after that. One of the things that Jung said was that people don’t have ideas; ideas have people. And that’s really something to think about because, you know, just think about your own situation. So no doubt you have political views and you think, “I have political views.” It’s like, “Well, no you don’t,” because you share them with a lot of other people. So, they’re certainly not yours. And not only that, they’ve had a very lengthy historical development far before you ever showed up. You know, so they’re rooted—they’re rooted right at the depths of your culture, but then of course they’ve been elaborated by one philosopher or another extensively over the last two or three hundred years and there’s this whole system of thought and poof! It inhabits you brain and then you think, “Well I’ve got political views.” It’s like, “No. The political views have you.” And that’s a very salutary thought because it’s one of the ways to stop yourself from being possessed. Because people get possessed all the time by ideas, right? That’s what happened in Nazi Germany; that’s what happened in the Soviet Union. It happens everywhere all the time. And you might think, “Well, possessed is a little strong,” but no it’s not actually. It’s a very nice—it’s a metaphor obviously, but it’s the right kind of metaphor because a body of ideas like political ideas, they’re a living thing, you know. They’re not some dead, dusty words on a bookshelf somewhere; they’re an integral part of a dynamic society. And the motive force those ideas have motivates you. You’re in their grip. And so, you can tell when you’re talking to someone who’s completely possessed by an idea system or an ideological system because they’ll just bore you to death unless you happen to belief exactly the same thing. So, they’ll spout out a few of their fundamental belief axioms and then you can identify which system they’re part of. And then they just speak in clichés from that point onward and you can predict everything they’re going to say if you know the axioms of the system. So, it’s very—it’s very non-authentic speech and that would be a way that say someone like Rogers or Abraham Maslow, who were humanists of the 1960’s, might talk about it. Because the person isn’t speaking from the depths of their own experience or from even their embodied knowledge. You know, they’re just mouthpieces for abstract ideas. And so it’s very frightening to realize the extent to which you can be the mouthpiece for abstract ideas, you know. And it’s actually one of the dangers of becoming educated, especially in a mass system like the university system, because a lot of what happens when you come to university is that you’re fed a set of predigested ideas—I suppose that’s one way of thinking about it, you know. And it’s very easy for you to think well that those are now you’re ideas; they’re not. They’re not. Lots of ideas you have to earn and if it’s a great idea then you really have to earn it. Because why should you be able to come along and like pluck up a great idea? That’s not how things work. You have to earn things that are valuable. So anyways, the depth psychologists, man they’re so good at that. It’s lovely to read them. And the problem too is with a lot of people we’re going to talk about it’s very difficult to summarize their work. You know, because often the devil’s in the details. So, you know, you might look at someone like Piaget is a good example—the constructivist that we talked about briefly. Man, the guy wrote dozens of books; you can’t just summarize those suckers. It’s not one coherent theory that you can boil down to, you know, ten axioms and then you can read it while you’re flying from Toronto to Montreal and poof you’re a Piagetian psychologist. Like, it doesn’t work like that. The people who formulated these theories were extremely intelligent and they were often great writers. And so a lot of the knowledge is actually in the writing itself and not in what you can extract out from the gist, you know. And most of the theorists: Freud—Jung it’s harder—but Freud, Rogers—people like that. You can extract out the gist of their theories and then you can—ah, what would you say?—you can stereotype it or you can caricature it and then you can point out how your caricature is absurd and you can feel like you’re even smarter than Freud. And, you know, you’re not. So, it’s not a good idea. And so these people should also be approached with respect because man they have so much to tell you. It’s so useful. Okay, so we talked about the depth psychologists, we talked about the constructivists; we didn’t talk about the humanists and the existentialists and the phenomenologists. It’s a mouthful of words, you know, so let’s put a little bit of foundation under those. So, if you’re a humanist—to be a humanist means really to be a creature of the enlightenment. And a humanist thought in some sense—at least this is what the humanists think—they think of it as post-religious. You know and they think of humanistic thought as putting the value of the human being at the center of the cosmos in some sense, valuing the person as they are, and then also valuing the person that they could be and promoting the pathways of development that would allow people to become what they could be as creatures that are valuable in their own right. So, a humanist, for example, would be very skeptical of claims, so let’s say standard Christian claims—and I use that example because the realm of ideas that these thinkers emerged out of was almost always Judeo-Christian. And, so, you know, the roots of their thinking are in those systems and you can’t understand their thinking without understanding that. So, part of humanism was a rebellion against the idea that life on earth so to speak was of limited value because anything of any importance was going to happen in the afterlife after you die. So, it’s like, “No, it’s here and now. It’s right now that matters. And you know, life in the present is what’s important, and you don’t need some kind of afterlife or some kind of belief in a transcendent reality in order to find value right here and now.” So you know, fine. There’s a lot of good things about that idea. You know and the whole idea that you can improve yourself in some sense is a humanistic idea. And most of you—I mean how many of you believe that can improve yourself? So, is there anybody who doesn’t believe that that’s willing to admit it? So, usually people only don’t believe that if they’re very depressed or hopeless. But it’s not self-evident, you know, I mean and in many cultures—you could think of medieval culture, for example, in Europe where you know you were sort of stuck in your position—there was no real idea of self-improvement. You could try not to sin but you weren’t going to get like radically better in some way; you were just who you were and that was that. But that’s not the case with the humanists. Now, existentialists, they’re kind of a different kettle of fish. So, you know, when Freud talks about psychopathology—because a lot of personality is about pathology, right, how personalities can go wrong—Freud kind of thinks of the normal person, roughly speaking, as healthy in their normality, but perhaps transformed into a pathological version of themselves by some sort of past trauma. And that might often be an abusive childhood, you know, or maybe a sexually abusive childhood because, you know, Freud talked a lot about that and it happens fairly frequently. So for Freud, all things considered, if you weren’t healthy there was a reason for it. You know, something terrible has happened to you and you needed to come to terms with that terrible thing, however you might do that, and put yourself back together and then you could wander along being a healthy person. But the existentialists, that’s not how they think at all. They think the standard human being is pathological. And the reason they think that is because they think that self-conscious existence, so life—the life of a creature who knows it’s bounded in time and space, right? Knows it’s vulnerable to disease and illness and death and the loss of things that they love. And the disintegration of all things in some sense is—that’s enough of a problem to give you problems without having to have been abused by it. And so the existentialists view life itself as a problem of sufficient magnitude that it can destabilize you mentally merely be being aware of it. And, so, they also believe that often what people do as a consequence of that is flee from their own awareness. You know, so how do you deal with the fact that life is suffering? Well, you don’t think about it. Well, for an existentialist, that’s not a very good answer. And I would also say, generally speaking, for clinical psychologists that’s also not a very good answer because the literature suggests pretty damn strongly that the harder you run from something that you’re afraid of the larger it becomes and the faster is chases you. So avoidance of–avoidance is generally a very bad strategy. Now it’s not always the case because sometimes you can’t do anything about something, really you can’t. Well, there’s not a lot of sense spending a lot of time planning and struggling against it, you know. And sometimes people are in generally genuinely hopeless situations but often not. So, I really like the existentialists, man. I think their—well all the people that we’re going to talk about—their thinking is extraordinarily valuable. You know, it helps situate you in your own life. It helps clarify the nature of your relationship to other people in the world. It helps you lay out what your future could be if you were the creature that could be. It’s really wonderful. Phenomenologists: they’re a tricky bunch. The fundamental phenomenologist was Martin Heidegger, who was also somewhat tangled up with the Nazis, you know, which was clearly not a good thing. And, you know, people debate about whether or not you can separate his philosophy from what tangled him up from the Nazis and I think you can. You know, so anyways, Heidegger wanted to take a fresh look at the nature of reality. And, so, Heidegger’s idea was we made a fundamental philosophical error way back when we were Greek—Ancient Greek roughly speaking—and that we started concentrating on the wrong elements of—he doesn’t really call it reality; he calls it being. So a phenomenologist is someone who’s concerned with being. And you might think, “Well what’s the difference between being and reality?” And the answer to that is it depends on how you define being and it depends on how you define reality. So, Heidegger’s observation was that, for modern people roughly speaking, reality was sort of a deanimated material objective substrata. It’s dead in its essence, roughly speaking, and the things that are most real are precisely those things. You could think about that as objective reality for all intensive purposes. But what Heidegger tried to point out is it’s a choice in some sense, because your knowledge is finite, because you’re fundamentally ignorant about most things, you have to decide that certain things are true and then act from that point. And, you know, Heidegger’s point was: there’s a lot of things that you can decide about at the very fundamental level of axiom. And so one of the things you can decide, for example, is whether or not the objective world is what’s more real or whether or not your lived experience is what’s more real. Now, you might think, “Well what’s the distinction there?” And I would say the distinction is probably something like watching someone in pain on a video and being in pain yourself. You know, so pain’s a good example of an element of being because it’s obviously—you experience it with your own…it’s hard to talk about just because he uses different terminology. Pain is an element of your being. And it’s not something—the pain itself is not something that you can even conceptualize in objective terms. Like you can measure it. You know, maybe your heart rate goes up when you’re in pain or something like that. Or your facial expressions change. You know, so you can index it but the indexes are not the phenomena; that’s hence phenomenology, right? And so phenomenologists have built up an entire system of thinking predicated on the initial axiom that the best way to approach life is to assume that being is the fundamental reality rather than the objective as the fundamental level. And then you might think, “Well, why do people bother with that sort of thing?” And part of it is: one of the—this is an existentialist claim—one of the consequences of developing the objective theory of existence was obviously all the amazing technology we have around us and, you know, great, thank God for that. Otherwise we’d be sitting outside freezing. But one of the consequences of that is once people established objective reality and then defined it as ultimately real, terrible questions of the meaning of life arose. You know, if the world—the universe—is made out of nothing but dead matter, it’s eternally existing, we’re nothing but a candle flash in the wind, the idea creeps into your mind that perhaps all the damn suffering isn’t worth it. Or to put it another way, you know, does your life really have any real meaning or is that just an illusion. Well, Heidegger would say the reason that you have that problem is because you’re approaching the entire problem wrong. Clearly, things have meaning; they just don’t if you make the hypothesis that what’s objective is ultimately real and everything else is merely a secondary consequence of that. So, anyways, it’s complicated. It takes a while to get your head around it. The humanists and the existentialists and to some degree the phenomenologists: they all came out of—there was a variety of sources for their thought and I would say one of them is the clash between religion and science or between value and objective truth. And they’re trying to rectify the division. And Piaget himself was trying to do some of that as well. So was Jung I guess. And the other thing is a lot of the existentialist and humanist work was post-World War II and so, you know, after World War II happened with its immense catastrophes, of course people who were thinking about human nature were very interested in why such a thing could happen. And existentialism, at least as a psychological school arose in part as a reaction to the horrors of World War II. It’s a very serious branch of psychology and it mostly characterized thinking in the 1950’s before the hippies came along and, you know, made everything sweetness and light, so—which is more where Rogers and Maslow fit. So, we’re going to talk about them a fair bit—the three different categories. It’s kind of a strange approach in some sense that this class takes because I talked to you about some psychologists in that period but the other people I talked to you mostly about, they’re not technically psychologists—depends on what you mean by psychologist after all. I talk a lot about Nietzsche and Dostoevsky and also a lot about a Russian literary figure, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, who wrote a book called “The Gulag Archipelago” which was one of the—there was a few cataclysmic events that brought the totalitarian system of the Soviet Union to a halt. And you can argue about what they were but one of them for sure was Solzhenitsyn’s publication of “The Gulag Archipelago” which is a 2700 word book—2700 page book, got to get that right—that describes what it was like to be there and how many people died. And it’s a searing book. He won a Nobel Prize and he deserved it. I mean, Solzhenitsyn: a remarkable person. He’s like the Dostoevsky of the twentieth century and that’s really saying something. And Dostoevsky’s another person I use a lot in that section. And both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche regarded themselves as psychologists fundamentally. And, you know, it’s funny because when you think about scientists, you know, you usually think about people who are conducting experiments, right? But, then, one of the things—and you’ll notice this if you think about it because a lot of you have taken a fair number of science courses of one form or another. And, you know, a lot of what you’re taught when you’re taught how to do science is how to generate, you know, how to lay out an experiment properly, how to get the methodology right, how to do the analysis properly, maybe how to structure the revealing of your findings in proper scientific format, you know, and how to test a hypothesis. But one of the things that you’re never really told about is, well, how the hell do you generate the hypothesis to begin with because, you know, really that’s a least half the problem and it’s probably a lot more than half the problem. And, so, part of being a scientist is the ability to be a hypothesis generator, not just a hypothesis tester. Maybe you need to be both to be a true scientist but maybe not. Maybe you can just generate extraordinary hypotheses and it’s certainly the case that people like Dostoevsky and Nietzsche were unbelievably good hypothesis generators. And so, you know, their thinking in many ways underlies the entire development of thought—the sort of thought that you guys are going to encounter in university anyways—their thinking underlies the entire development of the edifice of I would say both scientific and nonscientific thought across the entire twentieth century. And, so, it’s quite entertaining to go down there and, you know, wander around the roots of these sorts of things because you find out how things are linked together and why they’re linked together and how they developed and what that means. And, also, what it means for you to have those ideas and why you have them and what role they play in your life. So, okay, so, after that, that’s pretty much—in some sense, you might think that’s where the clinical and philosophical part of the course ends. Now, I’m a clinical psychologist and most of the people who were great personality theorists were clinical psychologists. And that explains to some degree why the first part of the course is philosophical. Because the thing about clinical psychologists and psychiatrists and medical doctors for that matter is that they’re not exactly scientists; they’re more like engineers. So, what an engineer wants to do—an engineer might use scientific knowledge and, you know, good for them; they should. But really what they want to do is make something change. They want to build something, they want to transform something, they want to act on a beneficial—generally—in a beneficial way. Well, the same thing is the case with the health domains. It’s like someone comes to you with a psychological problem. What you want to do is you want to make it better and better is not a scientific category. So, to the degree that you’re a—like you can say well it’s scientific because worse means abnormal. It’s like, that’s not right. You can make that case but it’s shallow because there’s lots of times when you don’t consider normal healthy. You know, you consider exceptional healthy, right? Or maybe you consider exceptional desirable and desirable might even be better than healthy, right? So, you can’t get out of the value domain when you’re trying to interact with people and sort out their lives. Because partly what you’re always asking is: “What’s wrong?” “What’s the matter?” “Why are you dissatisfied?” “Why are you suffering?” “Why aren’t you productive?” “Why do you fight with everyone?” You know, “Why can’t you sleep at night?” “Why do you wake up screaming?” You know, “Why can’t you pursue anything that’s to your own benefit?” “Why do you hurt everyone that you know?” You know, those are moral questions. And then the next problem is: “Okay, well what are we going to do about it?” “What do you want?” “How would you like your life to look if it could look the way you wanted it to?” And then, “How are we going to get from where you are to that?” And those are all—they’re engineering questions in a sense but above all they’re ethical questions because they deal with how to act. So, you know, I don’t want to just slide over that. Because that’s generally what happens because physicians and clinical psychologists and say psychiatrists—even though they’re physicians—they like to think that what they’re doing science and that’s not right. It’s informed by science, but that’s not the same thing. It’s particularly true with doctors because they’re not even trained to be scientists. So, okay so that’s that. And then the next part of the course—the last half—it concentrates on two elements of personality theory; more modern elements I would say although not more valuable necessarily because of that. Partly very neurobiological, because we’ve made a lot of strides in the last 50—100 years let’s say. In understanding the structure and the function of the brain. Like the things we don’t know about the brain, man, it’s—there are lots of things we don’t understand about the brain. We have no idea, for example, what its relationship is to conscientiousness except more or less it seems necessary. You know, so even that you can dispute to some degree because there are great case histories of people who were born with hydrocephalus. And so that means that your skull basically fills with water. And the most famous case of that was a French guy who went for an MRI for God only knows what reason—it had nothing to do with what was eventually discovered—but he only had five percent of his cortical tissue. His whole brain—his whole head was filled with cerebrospinal fluid and the brain was just a little skin around the side that was like a little balloon. And as far as they could tell there was nothing wrong with him. It’s like, “Hmm, well isn’t that interesting? What the hell’s all the rest of that brain for?” And then you get the other issue—like I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of (can’t remember her name…I think it’s Pepper…) She had a famous parrot—an African grey. You can look it up: talking African grey parrot. And that damn parrot, man, that thing could talk like a four-year-old kid. Way better than any chimpanzee. Full sentences, it seemed to know what it was doing. It’s like, it’s a parrot, right? Its brain is this big! So, how is that even possible? So, okay so there’s lots of things we don’t know about the brain really. And it’s unbelievably complicated. So, but we have learned a lot of things that are interesting. We kind of understand the existence and the location of the fundamental reward and pain and anxiety circuits. That’s a big deal. Those are like discovering major continents, you know? We understand to some degree how people learn and under what conditions they learn and we understand, I would say to some degree, what the fundamental motivations and emotions are. Now those are not scientific categories: motivations and emotions. They’re linguistic categories but we’re stuck with them. So, but we know a fair bit about their underlying neurobiological basis and I want to take you through that in some detail because for a bunch of reasons. Partly, because it’s provides a nice scientific underpinning to a lot of the hypotheses and presuppositions of the psychoanalysts, you know? So, for example, Freud hypothesized the existence of the id. Now there is no id in your brain but it doesn’t really matter because the id—the idea of the id—is a functional category; it’s like a tool. But there are lots of id-like structures in your brain. You know and one of them in particular is the hypothalamus and that thing—like human beings like to think that their really impressive cortical cap is the thing that’s, you know, in charge of things. But your hypothalamus, which is this little tiny thing that sits at the top of your spinal chord, man, that’s what running you. You know, as long as you’re not hungry or not angry or not chasing after sexual excitement and not gambling and not addicted; so, as long as you’re completely well fed and warm and comfortable, then you can think and you’re more or less in control. But as soon as any of those things go astray it’s subcortical all the way. You know, and you can see this, for example, in conditions like anorexia. You know, because anorexia—you could think of anorexia as a war between the cortex and they hypothalamus. And I’ll tell you man, the only time the cortex wins is when the anorexic dies, because other than that it’s the hypothalamus that wins all the time, which is why anorexics cannot stop themselves from binging. So, you know, so they’ll cut their body weight down to say seventy five percent of what it should be and that’s hard. Like you really—it’s not easy to starve yourself like that. But they’ll still binge like mad and, you know, eat a whole gallon of ice cream and two bags of bread. And they can’t stop themselves and that’s because your hypothalamus, it would rather you didn’t starve to death. And if you’re not paying attention, if you’re not on top of the game or maybe if you’ve been hurt recently and so your resources or your—what would you say?—the negative emotion has been interfering with your cognitive capacity, the hypothalamus will come up and grab you and say, “Man, you’re hungry and it’s off to the fridge with you.” You know, so two in the morning you’re going to be eating everything in there in a kind of a daze. And you’ll snap out of that and think, “Wow, what the hell was that?” It was like well, that’s the id, folks, and it’s no trivial thing. And it’s a good thing too because if it didn’t tell you what to do all the time—like think about how foolish you are. If you had to breathe voluntarily how many days do you think you’d go through? Eh, it’s like you’d wake up one day and an hour later you’d forget to breathe and then you’d be dead. So, like your brain doesn’t let you do anything important; it takes care of all that in the background, you know, because you’re just not that smart. I mean, you don’t know how to digest things, for example. You actually don’t know how you walk even though you can do it. So, there are fundamental subsystems, some of them aren’t even conscious, weirdly enough, even though they’re neurological: they’re doing all the heavy lifting. And like your cortex is along there—it’s along for the ride in some sense. And it sort of thinks its in control but yeah, no. Not really. Okay, so we’re going to talk a fair bit about fundamental brain structures and the function of those structures because I like functional neuroanatomy. I like—I don’t want to know just what the brain is made out of but I want know what all the parts are doing. And so, there’s difficult papers in there; Swanson, that’s a hard paper, and the paper by Gray. Those are papers that were written by I think genius-level neuropsychologists and, you know, they put their whole life’s work into a paper and so, you know, you’re going to pick it up and you’re going to think, “Wow, this is hard.” It’s like, “Yeah! Some genius spent thirty years writing it. It’s going to be hard.” But they’re so informative; they’re worth the struggle if that’s the sort of thing that you want to struggle with. So, that’s the biological end and then there’s the psychometric end. And psychometrics—very unpopular field of psychology, even among psychologists, and the reason for that is that psychometricians, I guess, have actually discovered things and people hate what they’ve discovered. So, and no wonder. So, for example, it was people who do psychometrics, engineers actually who entered psychology, who discovered intelligence. Technical psychometric intelligence. IQ. And people will tell you there’s lots of kinds of intelligence. It’s like, “No there aren’t. That’s wrong.” And it’s wrong in this way: the statistics that psychologists use were invented by the people who discovered IQ. And that means that every single thing that a psychologist has ever claimed that’s been verified in some way using some statistical process has been verified the same way that IQ was verified. And so you don’t get to say, “Well the IQ stuff’s invalid,” without saying all of psychology—and a lot of other fields—is invalid too because it’s the same methods of proof. And it’s even worse than that because like the relationship between IQ and life success is way stronger than the relationship between almost any other psychological phenomena and almost anything else. So, for example, for you guys, even though, you know, you’re all far above average in intelligence—because otherwise you wouldn’t be here—like at least eighty-fifth percentile. And that’s something to think about because a lot of that is determined by biological factors so, you know, so a huge chunk of the reason that you’re here is because, you know, you won part of the genetic lottery. So like hooray for you. And no one screwed it up too badly as you were growing up. You know, but even among you guys, the correlation between your intelligence and your grade point average is quite high even though it’s a truncated sample, right, because you’re all pretty bright. And even though there’s a lot of error in the grade measurement system because it doesn’t only index intelligence, it’s still very powerful. And, so, if you controlled for conscientiousness and other elements of personality, which you can do statistically, in twenty years the ten percent of the people in this room who have the highest IQs will have the highest income virtually certainly. You know, unless some terrible thing happens to them. You can overcome it to some degree if you’re really hard working. And that’s conscientiousness, you know, but that’s also a trait which seems to have quite a heavy biological loading. So, well so that’s the sort of thing that people hate about psychometricians because they come up with these facts and they’re facts that are really dismal. And I can give you an example: so you guys all have an IQ of over 115 roughly speaking. 100 makes you about as smart as the typical high school graduate. You know, 115—that’s kind of the low end for managing the rigors of a fairly high-end university. You know, 115, you’re still going to have a lot of trouble; you’re going to have to work like mad. So, but okay so 115: now, that’s one standard deviation above the mean. One standard deviation below the mean is an IQ of 85. Now there’s just as many people out there in the world who have an IQ of 85 as there are people who are able to go to college. Okay, so then you think, “What can you do if you have an IQ of 85?” And, well, here’s one answer: so, the US Army has been doing psychometric testing for a hundred and some years for a whole bunch of reasons but they’ve done a lot of the basic science, you know. And one thing about the US Army is they like to have recruits. And you can understand why because do you really want to go off somewhere and get shot? And the answer to that is generally no. So it’s not like there are people lining up to get into the army. Even in peace times it’s hard to get people. And also, the Americans have used the US Army as a—you know, imagine you have an underclass of people who aren’t doing well, which is the case in every society, and you want to boost some of them up, you know, into something resembling the middle class. You can do that fairly effectively by inducting young men in particular into the army because they get some training and, you know, they get some discipline and maybe they can kind of clamber up into the middle class. And so there’s a lot of policy reasons A) why the American Army armed forces want people, and B) you know, just to be in the army but also for social reasons—positive social reasons. So, they’re not likely not to let you in. The consequence of hundred years of IQ testing was the establishment of a law in the United States: you cannot induct anyone into the army; you cannot accept them into the army if they have an IQ of less than 82. That’s ten percent of the population. So you think about that. That means one person in ten cannot do anything that is of positive value in an organization that’s rather complex but not more complex than other organizations that’s desperate for people. Nothing they can offer has positive value. It’s worse to have them in the army than not to have them there at all. Really, now, you know, that’s a terrible way of putting it but it’s a horrible statistic. Because it also means, you know, if you think about the army as roughly equivalent to world in some sense in terms of it’s complexity, it means that there’s ten percent of the population who just cannot really exist well in a complex cognitive society. So, and you might say, “Well, you know, something should be done about that.” It’s like, “Good luck”. People have been trying to do something about that for a very long time. Like, there’s been billions, if not trillions, of dollars poured into attempts to do cognitive remediation in the United States. Well, not to mention that we actually have an education system and the goal is actually to make people smarter. So, we’re going to talk a lot about psychometrics and the thing about the psychometricians is they’re basically brute force statisticians. In some ways they’re atheoretical. You know, and they use computer power, roughly speaking, and advanced statistical techniques to look at large data sets and extract out patterns. And, you know, I was—I hated the Big Five when I first came on it. I thought, “Oh God, this is boring.” It’s like, there’s no theory behind it; it’s not prescriptive; it’s not interesting in any literary manner, like it doesn’t have a good story; it came out of—it’s so dry. But, you know, it works and that’s how it is. So, we’re going to spend a lot of time on psychometrics and, you know, my lab too has done a fair bit of work over the last ten years elaborating out the Big Five Model. So one of the things we’ll talk about is the Big Ten Model and what it does, roughly speaking, is break each of the five into two—we call them aspects. And they’re pretty interesting. Like they predict political belief, for example, quite nicely. So, conservatives tend to be more orderly, which is part of conscientiousness and less creative, less open. And liberals tend to be more open and less conscientious. Which a cynic would say that’s why they’re so into income redistribution: because they actually don’t work. So, you know, the conservatives work like mad and the liberals say, “Hey hey, how about some of that money?” You know, and, “The system’s unfair.” And the conservatives say, “Well no. We worked hard and we’re not giving you any.” Well, you know, they both have flaws in their theories. The liberals, by the way, make very good entrepreneurs. Like, no let me rephrase that. Most entrepreneurs are liberal in their political outlook and that’s because they’re high in openness. So the way it really seems to work is that liberal-minded people start businesses and conservatives run them. So, they’re necessary for one other. Yeah, well because the liberals, being open, they’re off to the next idea, you know, and they don’t want to attempt to the damn details; they get bored of that. They’re not particularly orderly, you know. But once you’ve established a process and it works you need someone to watch to make sure the process keeps working. Well that’s not very interesting if you’re a creative person. So, okay, so, that’s basically that. That’s the course. So, now, what have we got for time here? So I think what I’ll do now is I’m going tell you a story and you’re going to think it has absolutely nothing to do with what we’ve been talking about, but that’s okay. That’s okay. So I picked this weird picture. It’s a picture of Jonah—biblical character. It’s a 2500-year-old story so that’s a pretty old story. And generally if a story is 2500 years old it’s a lot older than that. You know, it just happened to be written down 2500 years ago, but, you know, that long ago it wasn’t like there were novels and books and that you could find fifty different stories, you know, at your fingertips. There were a few stories and everyone knew them. And God only knows how long they’d been around but it was a very very very very long time. So, this was written down 2500 years ago but we don’t really have any idea how old it is. And, in some sense, it’s almost infinitely old, at least on any human scale. Now, you see this picture and what you see is this thing that—what would you call it? Well, it’s a medieval idea of a whale is what it is. You know, and you might think, “Well, that isn’t really what a whale looks like,” and that’s kind of right but a medieval whale wasn’t the whale that we have. Like, whale in medieval times meant large terrifying underwater thing. You know, and, so, maybe that was—maybe a giant squid was a whale and a whale was a whale and a shark was a whale and, you know, the category’s not the same. So, that kind of accounts for the—that in pure ignorance is what accounts for the kind of strange mythologized representation. But it’s still a representation of something; it’s just a little generalized. Now what he’s doing is vomiting Jonah up onto dry land. So, and you think, “That’s pretty damn weird.” How many have you seen Pinocchio? That’s a lot, eh? How many of you haven’t? Really? You haven’t seen Pinocchio? What kind of parents did you have anyways? [Students’ laughter] Okay, well, you remember in Pinocchio that Pinocchio’s father is stuck in a whale, eh, and then Pinocchio has to go down there and rescue him. And one of the things you didn’t notice when you were watching Pinocchio is just how daft that is. There you are sitting there, you’re watching a puppet go down into the ocean to rescue his father from a whale. And you think, “Oh, that makes sense.” [Students’ laughter] It’s like, well also that’s interesting, right? That’s interesting. Why does that make sense? Why does that make sense? Because it doesn’t make any sense. But see that’s a good example of the grip of any archetypal idea because an archetypal idea is a very deep and old idea that makes sense to you even though if someone points out to you that you believe, which you more or less do while you’re watching a movie, you think, “Oh yeah, it’s really weird that I believe that.” It’s like, you know, and that isn’t a puppet going down into the ocean to rescue his father from a whale either, just so you know it. It’s a drawing of a puppet going down into the ocean to rescue his father from a whale so it’s like divorced from reality in all sorts of ways. But what’s so interesting is you go into the theatre and watch something like that and if someone taps you on the shoulder and say, “Hey hey, do you know what you’re doing?” You say, “Why don’t you shut up and let me watch the movie.” [Students’ laughter] Right, you don’t notice, “Oh yes I’m very peculiar. I’m a very peculiar thing sitting here watching this and not noticing how strange I am.” You know, and so well, that’s partly why I’m going to tell you this story, because it’s true even though it isn’t. You know, and that’s a funny thing. I had a very very strange professor at the University of Alberta. He died a few years ago. He got on a bus, I think it was in Winnipeg, and he never got off the bus and no one ever say him again. So, he had been a prison psychologist. He worked in the maximum-security prison in the University of Alberta so who knows, maybe he met one of his old clients. You know, it’s possible but it’s very strange—very strange ending. Anyways, one time we were talking about fiction, you know, and he said, “Fiction is a lie that can tell you the truth.” And that’s a very interesting way of thinking about it, you know, because you read fiction and, you know, it’s true. But it’s not obviously because it’s not really about a thing that actually happened. But it’s more than that in some ways because if it’s good fiction it’s about a whole bunch of things that happened sort of like that. Right, it’s a distillation. It’s like someone tells you a long story and then, you know, you talk to your partner and they ask you, “What was that all about?” And then you tell them in two sentences what it was about. You boil it down to the gist, right? Well a really good story is the gist of something. And some of the really old stories, the really weird ones like Jonah and the Whale, for example—which as I said is told to some degree in the story of Pinocchio—they’re the gist of a lot of things and people have been boiling those damn stories down for a very very very very very very long period of time. Thousands of people over thousands of years and they come up with these weird stories that people remember. And then people think, “Well, they’re real.” It’s like, “Yeah they are but they’re not real in the way a scientific story is real. It’s a different kind of real.” So here’s the story of Jonah. And so it’s an old Jewish story. There’s probably a variant of it in the Quaran, but I don’t know that variant so and maybe there isn’t. Anyways, Jonah lives in 500 BC and God has a chat with him one day and he says, “Look Jonah, there’s this city, Nineveh, and people there, you know, they’re really not on the straight and narrow and things are going to go to hell in a hand basket very rapidly if someone doesn’t do something about that. So, I think that you should go to Nineveh and you should tell the king and all the people that are there that, you know, really they’re just not doing the right thing”. And Jonah, being a perfectly intelligent person, says, “You want me to go to a city and you want me to go tell the king, like this authoritarian guy who has absolute power over everything, that there’s something wrong with what he’s doing that all his citizens are corrupt? That’s what you want me to do?” And Jonah says, “There’s no way I’m doing that!” because as I said he’s a smart guy. So he runs off and he goes to this town and as he’s running off he rents a boat more or less. And it’s a big boat and there are fishermen on it. And they’re going to like row him something that God can’t find him, which is not going to be an easy thing. And, so, God of course can’t be fooled by such relatively poor strategic choices because he’s omniscient and all that. And, so, he’s out on the water, Jonah, and there’s the fisherman there and then so God calls up this big storm. And the fisherman are shorting out about this because they’re going to swamp the boat and then they’re all going to die and they’re not that happy about that. So, what they decide to do is throw everything overboard so that the boat is lightened. But that doesn’t help much because the storm gets worse. And so then they all of them start praying. And they all have different gods so, you know, it’s like a little god competition. And one fisherman talks to one god and another fisherman talks to another god and nothing’s happening. So, Jonah happens to be asleep in the hold of the ship. Now, he’s already told them that he’s been running from his god and so they think, “Ha, we better go wake up Jonah because maybe he’s the guy that’s causing all the trouble.” So, they go down there and they wake him up and they ask him about his god. And he says, “Well my god made the heavens and the earth,” and their gods, they weren’t doing anything that magnificent so they’re pretty freaked out about this. And so they told Jonah it’s like, “What the hell are you running away from this guy for? It’s not a good idea.” And Jonah says, “Yeah, yeah, I’m sure it’s my fault that this storm has come up so why don’t you just throw me over.” And they say, “Well we can’t really do that because, you know, you shouldn’t run away like that, but you’re not a murderer or anything; we can’t just toss you over.” And so they decide to try to row to shore but God’s not having any of that. So, he raises up a big storm and it’s getting worse and worse and finally the fisherman say, “Ah, you know, over you go.” And Jonah’s into that because he knows he’s a bad guy. And, so, a whale swallows him. Now you think, “Hmm, that’s probably not exactly right because first, if a whale swallowed you then you’d be dead.” And it was probably a shark anyways. It’s not like you’re going to be thriving down there. It’s not a big cavern like, you know, like the Pinocchio whale; it’s solid and there’s no oxygen and so you’re dead. But that isn’t what happens. Jonah’s in the whale and he’s kind of freaked out by this because now he’s in a whale and there’s a storm and God’s angry at him. So, the first thing he does is pray and tell God what an idea he his and that, you know, he’d like to be forgiven. And so the whale zips up to shore and vomits him onto the beach, which the very very undignified mode of arriving anywhere. [Students’ laughter] So, that’s the Jonah story. And, then, of course Jonah picks himself up and he thinks, “Yeah yeah, you know, that wasn’t so good. It was a little rough. I think maybe I’m going off to Nineveh to tell the Ninehvites, or whoever they were, that they’re just not living properly because that’s a lot better than making God angry. You know, because what with the storms and the fisherman and the whales and all that.” So, then, he goes off to Nineveh and, you know, he tells them what’s going on and it seems to more or less work. So, that’s a very interesting story and you think, “Well, how did people believe that?” I mean, and one question might be: well, do you believe that story? And then you think, “Well no,” but then you think, “Well maybe that’s more complex question than you might think because it turns out that I believed the Pinocchio story.” And you say, “Well, no I didn’t really believe it,” and then I would say, “Well it kind of depends on what you mean by believe, doesn’t it?” Because you watched it and while you were watching it man you were into it, you understood it, you didn’t want it to be interrupted, you followed it. So, it’s like, did you believe it? No, you were like a four-year-old skeptic sitting there thinking, “Well, you know, puppet, whale. No, it doesn’t add up.” You’re not; you’re acting out your belief in it by being engaged in it and if someone taps you on the shoulder and wakes you up thirty years later or twenty years later you say, “Oh no, I don’t believe that.” It’s like, you know, it’s kind of remarkable what you’ll believe. I mean, how many of you are Star Wars like aficionados? You know you won’t admit it, will you? [Students’ laughter] Yeah, but there’s lots of you in here. I know. You know, and so that’s all mythology. It’s all mythology. You know that of course, the person who What was his name? The guy who came up with the Stars Wars idea. Lucas. Lucas was a student of Joseph Campbell. Joseph Campbell was a psychologist/mythologist and the Star Wars stories are updated mythology just like Harry Potter and all the other things that capture people’s imagination. So, you bloody well do believe this. And there’s a reason for it too. Now what time is it? Ah, we’ll stop there. I’ll tell you the reason the next time we meet. [Students’ laughter]
So A couple things I want to tell you about today Many things I want to tell you about I want to tell you Uhm I want to give you a schema that is going to enable you to understand I think it will enable you to understand stories Like the one I told you last time, you remember Jonah and the whale I want to provide you with the schema so you can understand stories like that But many many more stories like that Partly what I am telling you about today In some sense are archetypes And an archetype, it is an idea that was made most popular over the last 100 years by Carl Jung But it's a much older idea than that It's really a platonic idea in some ways And it means something like fundamental pattern And so an archetype manifests itself in different ways It could be a pattern of emotional response Like it can be something you are feeling It could be the way that emotional response displays itself On your body, on your face It could be the way that emotion feels and displays itself on your face And plays itself out as a drama in your local environment So like an angry argument is an archetypical phenomenon And the reason it's archetypical is because Well, you have them, you have them, you have them, you have them, everyone has them and so you can't  really think about them as individual, you have to think about them as universal and you can't think as about something that you created in a sense although, in a sense you do but it's also as something that happens to you now, when you read about Jung and archetype is quite confusing because you can never be sure whether it's talking about an instinct, an emotion, a motivational system, or a sub-personality or a sub-personality in which these things manifest itself, or even the social drama that's being played out in time and space in the social world but a real archetype I would say is all of those things at the same time. Now, we use archetypal means of expression to represent how we act And that's not the same thing as we think representing what the world is made out of It's a very different thing, so you could say in some sense we tell stories and understand stories so that we can figure out how people act and how they should act and then we conduct science so that we can figure out what the world's like from a material objective perspective and the two things coexist uneasily I think the more primary form of knowledge is actually how to act with a scientific model nested inside because the most important question you have to solve as a living organism isn't what the world is made out of it's how you should act in the world say from a darwinian perspective even so that you can live long enough to reproduce. that's basicly from a strict biological perspective in some sense that's what you have to do in order to be successful it's kind of obvious first of all 'cause you are not very successful if you just go and die and then, of course, death from a genetic perspective and failing to leave offspring are much the same thing Now, one of the questions might be how is that we conceive of the world as a place to act in and that's partly I'm gonna tell on the hypothesis for you and then explain the significance of that hypothesis and the hypothesis involves the description of what you might consider consitituent elements and also transformation processes as far as I can tell, the constituent elements of the stories that we tell about how the people act and should act are characters Now that makes sense, right, because  you really can't have a drama or story without characters Now, the thing is that characters have to be understandable and so, for them to be understandable they sort of have to be like you or they have to be like someone you know, but they have to be human but than again it's not exactly that they're human, because even when you're telling a story about what happened to you today it's interesting to think about what you do so someone might say "well, how is your day?", and you say "fine" i mean, maybe it's the lowest level, lowest resolution highest abstract srory "my day was fine" It's pretty boring story, it's better then terrible, I suppose it's not interesting, it's not detailed but person gets the notion that things went according to plan or, more specificly, that things unfolded the way you wanted them to
okay so we're going to talk about piaget today and as i believe i mentioned to you before piaget was perhaps the 20 20th century's foremost developmental psychologist he didn't really regard himself as a psychologist however in fact a lot of the people who've been great psychologists have come in from outside the field it's often engineers for example engineers have helped us establish most of our statistics anyways piaget i suppose would have regarded himself more as a biologist he called it called himself a genetic epistemologist and by genetic he didn't mean the genes that organize your cells and spin you up out of nothing he meant beginnings as in genesis and and then an epistemologist was someone who was interested in how structures of knowledge emerge and how they're constituted so he actually thought of himself as a biological philosopher now you know one of the things that's kind of sad about learning about great theories is that you hardly ever learn about how peculiar the people who formulate them are because generally they're extraordinarily interesting people you know that that in some ways that often they get sanitized in some way once they've become respectable and that's really quite unfortunate piaget was really a genius um he was offered a position at a large museum and and i remember i remember correctly it was perhaps it wasn't director but it was a position of approximately that stature he was offered that when he was 10 years old he'd written a paper on mollusk behavior which was published and his parents told the museum people that he of course they didn't know he was 10 you know that he probably wasn't up for the job at that time so but that gives you some example some idea about the magnitude of his intellect and piaget wrote a lot and you know usually what you hear about if you study piaget in north america if you hear about piaget you hear about his stages of development sensory motor etc and uh that really wasn't what piaget was all that interested in there was something about the idea of countable stages that seemed to appeal to north american developmental psychologists but piaget didn't really regard that necessarily as either the central or the most important part of his theoretical edifice and you know part of what piaget has been criticized for in recent years is that the stages don't necessarily occur either as he described or in the order that he described but in some ways he wouldn't have found that particularly distressing because it was more of an attempt to explain how the personality emerged out of nothing in some ways because in some ways you kind of emerge out of nothing you know and it's not that easy to figure out for piaget in some ways you sort of booted up although he wouldn't have used that metaphor obviously having existed in the time before that was a commonly known phenomena so he also was concerned about high-level metaphysical problems and so one of the things that really motivated piaget was the contradiction between science and religion that was very painful for him and one of the things that he had set out to do as a young man was to bridge the gap between science and religion and in some ways you might think about that in relationship to the sorts of things we talked about last class is that he was attempting to bridge the gap between a description of the world and a prescriptive description of the world which means what the world is and how the world should be or what the world is and how you should act and i think that's the most straightforward way of thinking about the division between religion and science because you need to know how to act you can think about it as a division between morality and science or you can think about it as a division between behavioral wisdom and science which i think is even a better way of thinking about it because it it takes the specifically religious element out of it so but anyways piaget wanted to devote his life to solving that problem and i would say that's what he did he also identified an interesting stage that you also hear very little about but seems to be to be something worthy of note and also worthy of consideration he thought that many people in their late adolescence went through a messianic stage and what he meant by that was that when late adolescents or young adults were trying to orient themselves in the world they were trying to figure out how they might plot their path forward in life so that they actually made a difference you know so they started to become concerned about the state of the world and about their role in determining that state and and getting interested in and perhaps involved in large-scale political or social movements and he was the only psychologist that i've ever seen who actually identified that as a stage but it's worth thinking about you know because it certainly is the case that many young people do pass through a stage that's something like that and it's interesting to speculate on it as a you know standard part of human development now i think it's probably more characteristic of people with certain personality types so i suspect if you're more extroverted and you're more open um particularly more open which is the creativity dimension in the big five that you're more likely to be politically and socially compelled you know so we know for example that openness is a very good predictor of things like political liberalism and uh you know certainly a lot of the millennial movements and the religious like movements that you see on campus that have what would arguably now be a political base seem to be associated with high openness so maybe that stage doesn't occur in everyone's life but it certainly seems to occur in many people's lives okay so now you might ask yourself well what was piaget up to and well he wanted to figure out a lot of things and he was interested in very very fundamental issues so for example his theories dealt with things like number and space you probably can't see that very well it doesn't matter i'll tell you what it says time and speed permanent objects how did how did a person develop the notion of what constituted a permanent object um how do you know when one thing is the same when it changes into something different so for example if you pour one bit of liquid from one container into another how do you know that the amount of liquid is the same how do children develop their ideas of chance and causality how do they develop their concerns about morality and their moral knowledge what what what are they doing when they're playing and i think actually piaget's most fundamental contribution as far as i'm concerned came in his studies and analysis of play and also to some degree his his analysis of dreams and he also spent a lot of time giving serious consideration to the role that imitation played in in the scaffolding of the human personality and so um some of the so now piaget believed that well i think this is the easiest way to talk about it actually we'll use this little diagram here so i'll shut this light off here it took me a long time to construct this diagram so not because it's all that technically difficult but it took a while to think it up so i want to give you a little bit of a background to it so imagine that one of the things that distinguishes a human being from a computational device say or at least the standard sort of computational device is that our primary cognitive problem is how to perceive the world so that we can act in it so that we can get what we need to have or want okay so all three of those things are roughly of equivalent importance right you have to be able to perceive and you have to be able to act because you can't act then you can't get what you need and if you can't get what you need then of course there isn't and you and so we're trying to always solve those problems simultaneously and we're also trying to do it in a way that's sustainable now what that means in part is that the knowledge structures of human beings are organized or or or they're organized along those three dimensions and those three dimensions also constitute the problem space in some sense that has to be addressed for a solution to be useful so not only do you have to be able to perceive in some accurate manner but the accuracy is determined in part on in terms of whether or not the way that you're perceiving helps you pursue something that you want to pursue and then the utility of wanting to pursue something is dependent to some degree on the relationship between the utility of that and the things that you need to continue to survive now some psychologists have addressed that by thinking about such things as fundamental drives you know and that was mostly a behavioral idea in some ways and the drive might be hunger and and the idea of a drive would be huh that hunger is a motivator that helps you put together strings of motor behaviors that are sort of run out in automatic sequence so that you can you can get the end that you want and continue on perhaps to fulfill another drive but the idea of drive is a little bit on the oversimplified side although it has its place i think that you can conceptualize the relationship between all of these by thinking in the following manner so imagine first of all that people are after something generally speaking now if you look at us you can kind of tell that we're the sorts of creatures that are after things and the way that you can tell that is first of all that we can move and and do so frequently so we're always on a voyage of some sort or a journey of some sort from point one to point two or from point a to point b i would say as well that that's also the um hallmark of a simple story if you're telling someone a story generally what you do is you tell them about a time that you were somewhere and then you did some things and you went somewhere else it's a very very simple story now the advantage of thinking about it as a story is that it helps you understand that the entire cognitive structure can't be reduced to necessarily anything that's for example that's drive drive-like you have to think about it as more personality-like and so you want something you orient yourself towards it now the way you do that generally speaking is with your sensory and your conceptual systems right so for example if you want to walk towards the door then you turn your head and you make yourself a mortal of the door and that model has to um be bounded by its relevance to your actions so you know the things that are going to be relevant to you about the door for example might be whether or not it's tall enough for you to walk through or whether or not the doors open or closed so that you can as you're walking towards it you can organize your body so that you can interact with the object as you see fit now you pick your goals and also for all sorts of different reasons and some of those reasons are more fundamental than others so for example fundamental by fundamental i would mean likely what i mean by fundamental is something like evolutionarily ancient you know so the the older the necessity or the older the system that's evolved to to allow you to pursue the necessity the more fundamental it is and there's there's ways of identifying what constitutes the fundamental elements of goal seeking behavior and you can do that in part by comparing yourself to other animals you know and so mammals for example all seem to gen to experience something that you might regard as anger or at least defensive aggression they're all hungry you know they all have the the they all act as if they're they're they're uh they highly value sexual behavior and so forth and so those you can't really think of those things as specifically human they're lower level than that now so at a fundamental level you have biological systems that are setting forth what might constitute a goal and you can think about that you can think that what the system is doing is setting the goal or you can think that the system is driving behavior but a better way of thinking about it is that the fundamental motivation motivational system sets up framework that's like a personality that then acts in the world and so this personality has something in mind that it wants it has a collection of perceptions that organize itself around that thing that it wants and then it has a plan or associated motor behaviors that it can lay out in the world that will take it from the point where it is to the point that it wants to be okay now so once you know that then you can start to think about these plans or these goals or these stories or these frameworks i think those are all you can even think about them as games in some ways you can think about them at different levels of complexity now what piaget was trying to do in part was to describe how a framework of this sort or a sub a sub element of personality might develop itself in complexity over time so so the the diagram i have here before you shows these little oval like figures and in the bottom left hand corner there's a box that says what is and in the top right hand corner there's a box that says what should be and then there's some arrows showing a planned sequence of behavior and the idea is that you have a sense of where you are and you have a sense of where you're going and that constitutes the framework within which you're looking at the world and then within that framework there's different things that you can do with your body in order to advance from the first point to the second point now it's it's important to understand that this sort of thing is grounded in behavior and not in conception because it helps you also understand the nature of these fundamental elements of personality the fundamental elements of personality are not descriptions of the world they're tools for acting in the world including the associated behaviors now whether they're behavioral or conceptual to some degree depends on their level of abstraction so so here's how to think about that so imagine that you say that someone's a good person and you might say well that's a description of them and that and when you think about description you tend to think about description the way that you would describe an object in the world like a scientific description but when you talk about someone as a good person you're actually not describing them as an object in the world you wouldn't even describe yourself as an object out in the world that way what you're doing is using a shorthand to represent a higher the hierarchical arrangement of their personality and you can get away with it because when you say good person to someone they already have an understanding of good person and they know what that hierarchy is and so you don't have to explain the whole thing to them and you can understand each other without even necessarily knowing exactly the details of what you're talking about but i'm going to tell you now what i think you mean when you say that sort of thing so imagine that a good person is a description at the very at the top end of a hierarchy okay because good the good is a very high level philosophical abstraction it's a high level value be good okay so what does that mean if you decompose it well we'll do it in a relatively straightforward manner one that isn't really it's more observational than philosophical so let's say you take you take someone who's a 40 year old mother for the sake of argument and who will say she also has a job so if she's a good person and she's a mother you might think that's one sub element of her personality if she's a good person is being a good parent right and i think you put person above parent in the hierarchy because to be a good person you can be a good parent without being a good person but it's hard to see how you could be a good person without being a good parent so and maybe if you're a good person you're more than a good parent you know you're probably a good partner and maybe you're good at your job and like there are there are large domains of activity that you're good at or good in and if you sum your behavior across that or average your behavior across that or something like that then you end up reasonably being described as a good person maybe you're a good friend as well and so good person has levels of hierarchy underneath it and we're and then each of those things that have levels of hierarchy each of those entities at the level of hierarchy right underneath good person can also be decomposed so we're going to decompose them and we're going to see what happens because partly what happens is if you decompose them you get right to the bottom it's not an infinite decomposition and so i also think this is one way that you can think about the relationship between the mind and the body because the relationship between the mind and the body is a very tricky thing because the mind seems to be made of stuff that's other than the body and i think there's some truth to that partly because we don't really understand consciousness but there are but that's a complex problem and i think you can get a fair ways in addressing the mind body problem without having to drag in the problem of consciousness so okay so we could say well good person sub element of that is good parent then you might think well what is it that you need to be doing to be a good parent and we might say well um you have to have a good job maybe that's one up in the hierarchy but whatever you have to have a good job because otherwise you can't provide for your children and you have to be able to to care for the children you might say well someone's good at caring for children and then you might ask them well what does it mean to be good at caring for children and then you have to sort of think of the sub elements that would go into caring for children and so one of them here is uh you have to know how to cook a meal or complete a meal and then you also have to know how to play with the baby so we could concentrate on playing with the baby and so what do you do when you're playing with the baby you might play peek-a-boo you might tickle the baby and you might clean the baby okay now you start thinking well obviously once you're starting to get down to that level of detail so that's a high-resolution model right you're you're starting to move from a low resolution model good person to a high resolution model which are what are precisely the multitude of elements that make up being a good person well if you're playing peek-a-boo with a baby for example all of a sudden you're doing something that's not exactly conceptual being a good person is conceptual but playing peek-a-boo isn't conceptual and the reason it's not conceptual is because you actually have to move your hands to do it so if you get to a high enough level of resolution in the description of a personality what you start describing are patterns of behavior now they have associated you know they have an associated motivational framework and a viewpoint that goes along with them so that i would say well even while you're playing peek-a-boo with the baby that the element of you that's playing peek-a-boo is best described as a sub-personality it's a playful sub-personality and then it's the sub-personality that specifically knows how and is motivated to play peek-a-boo but what it's composed of is no longer a sub-personality it's starting to be composed of actual movements so and then underneath that if you go to higher resolution like okay what's the movement composed of well obviously you start to have to talk about musculature and then if you go below that it's molecular movements and so on but but once you're down below voluntary movement there's really no you there anymore right you sort of fade into unconsciousness because you know how to go like this but you don't exactly know how to move the specific muscles that enable you to go like that or even if you do you don't know how to twitch the muscle fibers or something like that right there's some le you don't know how to operate the cells there's some level of resolution underneath voluntary motor control that that basically runs on automatic and to some degree you're capable of like steering it but you're not really capable of you're certainly not capable of being conscious of it so the the abstract moral conception which is also a description good person hits the world at the level of motor output now and a lot of like even your sensory movement a lot of that's motor output right because a lot of what you're doing with your eyes is moving them so all right now what does that have to do with piaget well one of the ways of understanding piaget is that he built he was really interested in understanding how that entire system came to be and his theory is a bottom-up theory he says okay yeah this is this this is he hasn't said this but it's a very useful way of thinking about it because piaget believed that you started with small elements of what he called reflexive behavior and then you learn to chain them together in increasingly complex structures and then you chain those complex structures into more and more complex structures and so on and so forth until you built up the entire hierarchy but you tended to start from the bottom so piaget was particularly interested in what the minimum conditions were for something to emerge into the world so that it could build itself out of nothing and that's really what he was interested in when he was starting to talk about infant development and so piaget's hypothesis was something like this um well chill babies are born very very immature you might even say that they're born premature so um a human baby if you took a mammal of red about human size and you said well what's its average gestation period across the animal kingdom you'd find out that for an animal of our size we should have a gestation period a pregnancy period of two years so we don't we have a gestation period of nine months and so you might ask well why is that and the answer is complicated obviously but here's some of the reasons as far as people can tell um we have big heads and they've really been expanding rapidly over particularly over the last two million years but let's say since we split off from chimps that's about six million years we have very very large heads and you know if you look at a baby a baby's head is pretty damn disproportionately large compared to its body like that a baby's like a third head and so even when the baby's little nine months old well nine months after conception and maybe a year and three months before it's supposed to be born its head is already extremely big now you think well what's the problem with that and the problem with that is well the bigger your head is the harder it is to be born and you might say well why haven't the pelvic areas of human beings adjusted females in particular adjusted so that they could handle the birth with a larger head and the answer to that is well they have to some degree which is why women have wider hips than men do but the problem is evolution is a conservative business and it can only in some sense tinker with what it's already got and so if you look at the basic bought your basic body plan your basic body plan at most in its most fundamental levels was established some some tens of millions or even hundreds of millions of years ago and then the basic mammalian body plan was established say 60 million years ago and so if you go i went to the smithsonian once and they have a skeleton museum at the smithsonian it's sort of like a zoo for for skeletons and it's really interesting place to go because you can see much more how alike mammals are when you see their skeletons so for example if you see a bat skeleton it looks just like a human skeleton except the fingers are really really long but it's the rest of it's like yeah that's basically the same skeleton as a human being it's just that the pieces have blown up in size or shrunk or or contorted or something like that but it's exactly the same damn structure so as as the brain was growing and the skull was getting larger and women women's bodies had to adapt to that well there was parameters within which the body had to work and it turns out that if you make the hips any wider and you make the hole in the middle of the many bigger then the hips start to lose structural integrity and the other thing that starts to happen is the woman can't run so there's this weird you imagine that evolution takes place within this set of constraints and so what's happened is the baby gets born way earlier the women's hips are wider with a larger pelvic hole but not so wide they can't run and not so wide they're not strong and the baby's head is collapsible roughly because the bones aren't completely fused at birth and so generally especially if it's a larger baby if it's born when it when it emerges just after birth its head is quite compressed cone-shaped even so and that's hard on the baby but it's not nearly as hard on the baby or the mother as not being born at all so anyways babies are born pretty premature and you know that puts a tremendous burden on human parents because of course the child is you know can't even walk for the first year whereas you take a deer when a deer is born or an animal like that you know it's three minutes later it's wobbling around on its feet and then it's running away from lions the next morning it's like that's that's not us you think why not it's well we're born very very premature and very very um vulnerable and you know it's a major load on the on the parents anyways one question piaget was interested in is well what exactly is a baby born with and he thought well they're born with a couple of things one is here's three things in a sense you might think they're born with a couple of reflexes and what you might think of a as a reflex is that it's a built-in module of sensory motor capability and maybe it it and you know maybe there's a motivational element to it as well so i would say it's a built-in sub-personality that's a very narrow sub-personality has a very narrow task and so one thing's one thing babies can do is root so if you touch them on the side of their cheek then they root and basically what that means is that they use their mouth and their head to search for something to latch onto with their mouth and that would generally be a nipple so they come pre-wired to be able to use their mouth and their tongue and certain muscles of their head in order to figure out how to feed and that's actually a very complicated behavior and so one of the things you see with babies is that their mouth and their tongue is all quite wired up already so if you're looking at a newborn baby the intelligent part of the baby in some sense like the part that's already there is very much oriented towards its mouth and its tongue and that's sort of like freud's idea of an oral stage in some sense although you know you could debate that but that's partly why freud thought that way he knew that babies were very mouth-oriented once they can start using their hands and they can pick up objects what do they do with objects they put them in their mouth right why well because that's what babies do partly but that's not the only reason is like if you look at them okay so back in the 50s 40s maybe even earlier than that there was a neurosurgeon named wilder penfield who worked at the montreal neurological institute and he was one of the people who first did um surgery for example for epilepsy so if you have epilepsy what happens is generally you kind of have a short circuit there's a malfunctioning set of neurons usually in the hippocampus and they produce like a positive feedback electrical circuit and it's like a little electrical storm and it'll start in damaged tissue and then spread across the whole brain and one of the things the early neurosurgeons were doing was dividing the brain in two to stop the hemisphere that had the damage from being able to spread pathological electric electricity across the entire brain now when you're doing brain surgery you don't want to take out anything that isn't absolutely necessary and so one of the things the brain surgeons do and still do did and still do is that they do brain surgery when you're conscious which is quite a horrifying thought really because you know your head is stuck in this little machine that doesn't let it move and then they're poking around in your brain and you have to tell them what's going on while you're doing it and if you stop being able to respond then i presume they assume that they've made a mistake and you know tough luck for you but anyways penfield was interested not only in you know conducting his surgery properly but also in mapping out the brain to figure out well what parts of it could you use and you know what do you have to keep and what parts can you maybe get rid of and part of that was because there was an idea for a long time among neurologists called equal potentiality which meant that the the cortex was an undifferentiated mass of tissue and you could take out parts of it without really much loss of function at all um which that turned out not to be exactly right although it wasn't as stupid as an idea as it might seem because the cortex is less differentiated than other parts of the brain but it turns out that if you take out parts of it like the prefrontal cortex the damage that it does is not immediately evident but if you watch the person for any length of time well usually their lives fall apart if their prefrontal cortex has been damaged enough anyway so penfield was trying to figure out what the brain does and so he was using electrodes to touch the surface and what he found if you imagine that this is the frontal part of your brain here and it's called that because it's at the front right and so there's a the back part of it has to do more with sensory uh processing and then there's a fissure down the middle and on the front side of the fissure there's an area that's roughly triangle shaped on the back of the fissure there's another area that's roughly triangle shaped and the front part if you touch it with a with an electrode like of the right current obviously then people will report feeling something on different parts of their body and then if you touch the part that's behind the fissure so roughly about here it's so then they'll they'll be inclined to move or feel the impulse to move and so what what pinfield did was draw a little map of what parts of the brain were connected to what sensory sensations in the body and what parts of the brain were connected to what motor sensations and he he built this thing called a homunculus it's a little it's a little picture and the picture is of this creature that's laid out on the cortex it's sort of like a dismembered body in some sense and the size of each part corresponds to the amount of tissue that's devoted to processing that brain or that bodily area and what you see is very very interesting because if you look there's a sensory homunculus that's how your body looks to your brain from a sensory perspective and there's a motor homunculus which is how your body looks to your brain from the perspective of being able to operate it what you see for example is with both the sensory and the motor cortex the hand is as big as the whole body and the thumb is as big as the rest of the hand and then the mouth and the tongue are also that big and so is the face so you've got this little itty-bitty body because what are you what are you going to do with your back you know you you can't pick up anything with your back and you're also not very good really your your sensory perception on your back is not very high resolution so if i had one of you stand up and i put three fingers on your back this far apart and i said how many fingers were there you wouldn't be able to tell you'd say one probably but you can't tell even if you space them out quite a bit if you push simultaneously whereas on the surface of the hand you can tell immediately because this is a high resolution part of your body and of course you know you can really move your little tentacley appendages here and they're highly wired up to the brain as well and very very sensitive but the reason i told you all that because it's also particularly true with the mouth and the and the lips and the tongue and then also the entire face that's because your face is extraordinarily mobile and you know you broadcast emotion with it and so it's a it's a communication device of the highest order and so it has to be really wired up you have so much neural control over your face that you can actually teach yourself to fire single neurons in the tissue underneath your eye so which you certainly are not going to be able to do with your back and then of course well why would you anyways so now so what i'm telling you that in part so that you get some more understanding of how the child is wired up because that mouth tongue lip sort of arrangement that that that the baby is born with is in that very very powerful learning circuit and it's established quite nicely right at birth and so then the baby can start exploring the world using parts of it that are already there and a big chunk of that is the mouth so and you know you know how this works some of you have recently had dental surgery of one form or another or at least you can remember when you had it maybe you had a tooth fold or a filling or you had braces put in or something so one of the things you'll notice if you lose a tooth is that your damn tongue is in there where the tooth was for the next six months right fiddling around and you can do it consciously which you will sometimes but even if you're not attending to it your tongue will be in there checking out every tiny little crack and crevice in the new area and what it's doing is updating your map of the map of your body because your mouth wants to know what part of it's you and what part of it isn't because first of all you're not supposed to chew the parts that are you and second of all if there's any foreign body in the mouth obviously you want to get that out of there for for endless numbers of reasons so you can detect surface variation with your lips and tongue with tremendous accuracy and of course you know there's all sorts of uses that people put that ability to it's also one of the ways that people uh test each other out for sexual compatibility right because that's all mouth and tongue work rough not all of it obviously but at least some reasonable proportion of it and so that's also a part of exploratory behavior so you're testing for things like health with with kissing and with smell so anyways it's a major part of you you know and not only is it a part that you that you explore the world with so that you can figure out what to eat and what not to eat which is a big problem for omnivores right because we can eat damn near anything and that's a complex cognitive problem but you also can use it as a tool for exploring the contours of the world now animals really do that with smell right because your typical animal is a smell-based creature whereas human beings aren't really so much that probably because we became upright and for a bunch of other reasons but smell is a tremendously powerful um modality and it's pretty much fully there at birth as well and you know mothers report that they can distinguish their baby by smell virtually you know a day or two after they're born they know the smell and babies can certainly smell their mothers and their fathers as well it doesn't take very long at all so anyways the baby's got its mouth and so it can start getting somewhere with that and then it's also got basic reflexes you know and now what a baby does in some sense is it's it's it starts developing from the middle and the top downward and outward so the mouth and the nose are all wired up the eyes start to get wired up fairly quickly they're not much to begin with because a baby will move its eyes independently and it's not very good at focusing although its focal length is actually its natural focal length is pretty much exactly the distance from breast to mother's eye which makes perfect sense right because the baby wants to be able to communicate extraordinarily well to produce a bond with the mother and that happens most frequently with during breastfeeding which is also extremely good for the baby because the baby gets touched and babies really really really really need to be touched if you don't touch them they die so even if you feed them and shelter them and all those sorts of things they have to be touched and it's it's very good for the baby's development so anyways the baby starts out with its its uh its ability to explore with its mouth and its tongue and its and its ability to smell and then it starts to develop its eyes but it does that in concert with developing other parts of its body you know and so the baby if you put the baby on its stomach then it starts to exercise its ability to lift up its head and so it kind of gets that going and it starts to learn how to use its arms and its legs and um so one thing you can do for a baby for example to help it get going so let's say the baby's in its crib it's laying face upward okay you can give it a mobile now if you go into a baby store and you look at mobiles what you'll see is maybe the top part is like two coat hangers right it's like a cross and then there's things hanging from it and the things will be i don't know maybe they're cute who knows hello kitty things or some damn thing like that you know and they're facing you well that's a stupid mobile because you aren't the person who's supposed to be looking at the hello kitty thinks the baby's supposed to be looking at it so those should be facing down and they never are they're always facing sideways so when the baby looks up all it sees is a bunch of horizontal lines but so let's assume that you're reasonably bright and you get one that the baby can see and then maybe it should be black and white or at least really really bright primary colors because it's easier for a baby to detect that black and white is really good because baby's pretty good at detecting edges and so that thing will move around the baby will lay there and watch it you know and babies they i think they kind of look like they're stoned on lsd all the time you know and i actually think that's technically correct because one of the things that hallucinogens do is reduce the um inhibiting power of memory on perception and of course babies have no inhibiting power of memory on perception because they have no memory so they're pretty much you know completely overwhelmed by the world all the time so they're laying there watching this mobile and you know you can shake it and maybe they'll have a little reflex at that or or you can interact with in some way and the baby will start checking that out and it'll watch it watch watch it it'll watch partly so that it can get its eyes organized and it does that in concert to some degree with its motor ability you know because you might say imagine you're cross-eyed a little bit like a baby and you're looking at that thing and there's two of them and you might think well how do you know there's not two of them and the answer to that is well you have to whack it with your hand as soon as you whack it with your hand you're gonna find out if it's one thing or two things once you figure out whether that's one arm or two arms you know and so the baby is starting to to whack itself against the world and watch the consequences to help it start to build up its ability to interact with the world and its ability to model the world and so one of the things you watch for example if you put a baby in a crib and it's got a mobile there you want to kind of move the mobile down so that it's close enough so that the baby might be able to bump it because babies if you if you don't swaddle them they lay there and their hands and legs sort of float in space like this and it's because they're not really very well connected to them and that's why a baby will poke itself in the eye now and then with his thumb and it's rather amusing to watch in a kind of bleak manner so a baby will lay there and it'll poke itself it'll go like that and what it's just discovered is that there's some relationship between that random movement and that sensation okay now okay so let's say it's laying there and it's floating around in space and it's fortunate enough so that its leg comes into contact with an element of the mobile well that'll make the mobile do something interesting and novel and when the bait when the mobile does something interesting and novel that triggers a reflex in the baby and the reflexes that the baby will orient towards it and look and so for piaget that was the circuit that was the beginning of the baby's ability to sort of start bootstrapping it up in the world and he thought what you needed was the ability to move a little bit at least so that'd be the reflex say or even randomness and then you needed the ability to refine that movement so that you needed to be able to practice it and you needed to be able to improve with practice and you needed to be able to imitate and one of the things that piaget thought which i think is so smart it's so smart is that what a lot of what babies did was imitate themselves so for example maybe they're they're lying in bed and they're starting to get some sense of of the connection between of how their arms and legs work and so they can maybe make start to make sort of broad gestures and that's it but now and then they they're lucky and they're sort of flinging their arms around and they hit the mobile and they get a little reflex out of that that's a startle and an indication of interest and then they'll sit there and practice how to whack that thing with their hand and so then what so what they're doing is they kind of accidentally produced a phenomena of interest and they noted the consequence and then what they do is try to reduplicate the phenomena of interest so basically what they're doing is manifesting different patterns of quasi-voluntarily reflex quasi-voluntary reflexive behavior and then if that produces something of note they'll practice imitating it so when my daughter was about 18 months maybe not even that old 13 14 months maybe old enough to sit up anyways and old enough to start to do some things by herself we bought her these books they were disney books hardcover cardboard books you know five pages long or something each of the pages was quite thick because it was made out of cardboard and they four of them would come in a little box which is about four inches high and about an inch and a half wide and if you were really careful you could take out the books and then you could put all of them back in it wasn't that easy because the first one wasn't too hard but they got consi you know consistently more difficult as you kept putting each of them in because the parameters of the exercise changed and she must have spent i don't know 150 hours dumping those out picking them up putting them in and you might say well what was she doing and you know you'd say well she was putting books in a box that's not what she was doing first of all they weren't books to her and it wasn't a box because she didn't know what a box was what she was doing was practicing going like this you know and matching the size of something to uh to the size of something else and that's very complicated and maybe you know so there's a a jar of apple juice okay so you might say well pick that up okay well you can pick it up like this you can pick it up like this you can pick it up like this you can pick it up like this like there's a lot of things to practice and each of those movements is a different sensory motor capacity that has an incredibly wide range of potential applications so a child will sit there and fiddle about with their hands and their arms and the rest of their body for untold hours because what they're doing is building up these basic sensory motor systems from the bottom up so that they can you know so so they practice them in one domain where there's some challenge and then they're starting to build new exploratory tools that they can go out and practice on the rest of the world so you know once you can grip uh let's say once you can grip a mobile and you can let go which is something babies actually have a hard time doing because they have a grip reflex and they're quite strong when they're first born if you put your fingers in their hands you can lift them right off the ground they'll cling to you and that's probably old chimpanzee gripping behavior because chimps grab to their mother's fur and then they're like carried around like that for about three years now since you don't have much fur it's kind of useless for the baby although they're pretty good at getting your hair and your glasses and your nose and so and you've got to get them to let go so anyways they'll sit there and practice all these little sub routines and so you'll see this too if you have a baby you've got your baby in the high chair maybe it's nine months old and you're trying to feed the baby which is often very uh challenging because babies are very curious and annoying and troublesome and tough and ornery and exploratory and and misbehaving and provocative and all those things because they need that to learn about the world and they'll they'll do something like maybe they'll eat and they'll drop the spoon and a mess will go on the floor and they think wow gravity that's interesting so then you'll give them their spoon again and the first thing they'll do is take their food and fling it on the floor and then they'll do that lots because they're kind of interested in this whole twisting the spoon and having things fall on the floor phenomena and so it's part of the reason why it's often hard to feed babies is because even if they're hungry you feed them three things and then they're not starving and then they're so hyper curious that they're gonna you know try to do something else so but what they're doing is they're they're continually utilizing their basic reflexive behavior and building more and more complex structures up on the basis of that and with each time they do that it opens up a new toolbox for them and they you know expand outward and start to interact with the world and so that's one way also of understanding where a baby's personality comes from now this is complicated because there are things about babies that are sort of their parameters of personality are somewhat determined at birth so i'll tell you how i i've conceptualized this it's it's how you might conceptualize the relationship between nature and nurture i don't know if this is a good metaphor or not it's not the most elegant metaphor in the world but it's worked for me so imagine for example that a baby at three months of age can be a calm baby or a nervous baby now that is the case we know that even right at birth you could kind of figure out whether a baby is a calm baby or a nervous baby that's neuroticism that's the fundamental dimension of negative emotion so you might say that one baby's nervous behavior might have this range and another baby's nervous behavior might have this range and another baby's nervous behavior might have this range and most of the time it's sort of in the middle of that range and now and then it'll manifest behaviors that are associated with what's extreme for it so even if you have a calm baby sometimes it'll get upset and even if you have a baby that's always upset sometimes it will be calm so then you might ask yourself well to what degree can you modulate the baby's nervous behavior so let's say you want to have more calm baby and so you're going to do some things to make that baby calm the question is how much transformation can you make and the answer to that to some degree is it depends on how much effort you make so changes that are close to the average of the baby's natural curve of responses are fairly easy to make so you can shift the baby a little bit towards being more calm without too much work but if you want to shift it more towards being calm then that's going to take more work and if you're going to shift it more to be calm that's going to take more work and it's not linear so what happens is at some point you kind of reach a practical limit you're not going to make your baby more calm than you know maybe you could move it one standard deviation or two standard deviations from its its natural resting place when it was first when it first emerged as a creature but if you're going to move it three to met three standard deviations like from the fifth percentile to the 95th percentile you're going to be working up you're not going to be doing anything else with the baby so you can sort of conceptualize the relationship between nature and nurture as a cost relationship so for example iq is quite stable but you can move iq but it's really expensive so there's a practical limit to it so i think if you take twins that are adopted out at birth in order to get a 15 point difference in iq between the twins by the time they become adult one twin has to be at the 95th percentile for wealth in their family and the other twin has to be at the fifth percentile for wealth so that's a massive difference right it's huge and so it's such a big difference you're not going to produce that with any degree of ease in the real world but so environmental transformations of biological parameters cost that's a very useful way of thinking about it so so anyways back to the baby now the baby is starting to organize itself from the bottom up and so here's here's kind of a way to think about how that works piaget pointed out that and this is quite well known in the development literature that babies that are younger than three don't really play well with others and it's complicated because they can play some things with others so for example you can play peek-a-boo quite well with a nine-month-old you know so there's some sort of simple games that that babies can play with you pretty much as soon as they get their eyes focused and one of the funny things about babies when they're very young even below nine months is that they already have a sense of humor which is something i've never been able to figure out so they can play little comical games with you as soon as you're smart enough to figure out what the baby's up to roughly speaking because they they appreciate humor absurdly early and it's very difficult to understand why look anyways it doesn't matter the piagetian idea was in some sense that what the baby does to begin with is first plays games with itself so it's exploring you know and then it produces some phenomena of interest and then it replicates that until it masters it and then you know it just keeps doing that and it gets to be more and more and more complex and then by the time it's about three it's complex enough so that all of its little micro systems are kind of integrated into one thing you know so it's got a set of routines for being hungry it's got a set of routines for being anxious it's got a set of routines for being exploratory it's got a set of routines for seeking um attention from its parent and so on and then it's starting to build some overarching unity among all of those micro processes so that it can segue smoothly between them and you can really see this starting to happen at two because you know you've heard of the terrible twos and what happens in the terrible twos is that the child's still fairly unintegrated and so they'll go they're quite a riot to be around because they're staggeringly emotional you know they'll go from giddy beyond belief to crying outrageously to so angry that if you ever saw an adult that angry you would immediately run away and call the police and they can do that like in 15 minutes they just cycle through these things very very rapidly so and and weirdly enough adults will notice behaviors they'll see behaviors in children that would be absolutely outrageous in adults and they don't even really it doesn't phase them at all it shows you how well adapted we are to children because you know a child who's having a tantrum if the child's good at it you know they'll fling themselves onto the floor which you rarely see an adult do and then they'll pound and kick and scream and then if they're really good at it and some of them get really amazingly good at it they'll hold their breath until they turn blue and pass out it's like try that one night when you're you know when you don't have anything to do and you're and the power's off you know just see if you can kick and scream on the floor for a while and then hold your breath till you turn blue and pass out you can't and that just shows you how you know committed to the tantrum a child can be so it's easy to stop that sort of behavior by the way um so if your child throws a tantrum it's at home just go away and then eventually the child will turn blue and you know pass out then they'll come too and there isn't anyone there and that's not really an exciting outcome so if you do that two or three times the child usually figures out that it's really not worth the hassle if you want the child to continue wait until they turn blue and pass out and then really freak out especially if you can do that randomly a few times man you'll get that child just having tantrums turning blue and passing out pretty much everywhere yeah so don't don't do that that's a bad idea so all right now so the piagetian idea in some sense is the child builds up these little reflexes and these little we'll call them sub personalities because it's a better way of thinking about it and it starts to build them around modern psychologists would think more that it starts to build them around motivational systems piaget wouldn't necessarily said that but and then at some point the child starts to enter the social world now it's simple in some ways to think of the child before three as not social and then the child after three is social but it's not really accurate right because if you think about it the child is being social right from the beginning of its development because first of all it has to figure out for example how to feed even if it's not being breastfed it has to figure out how to participate in a playful and social manner around feeding and that's particularly the case if the child has to breastfeed because breastfeeding is very complex process first of all you have to get the mother to cooperate and you can't bite her for example and so there's all sorts of rules about breastfeeding that the baby has to follow and so the baby's actually entering into fairly complex social relationships and games right from the beginning and that's especially true if it also has siblings because if you know if you have a baby and maybe you have a two-year-old the two-year-old and the baby are playing right off the bat and their two-year-olds are amazingly good at playing with newborns it's quite staggering to watch them and so if you're thinking about having children i also recommend not just having one because one child is way more work than three because you have to amuse one child all the time whereas if you have three you can ignore them completely and they'll just raise each other it's actually much better for the children you know as long as you're there not to make sure they don't light each other on fire and that sort of thing which is you're basically your job so okay but we'll act for the time being as if the child isn't social till three because that's a simplification but it's a useful one so piaget was also extremely interested in how the child became social and i think apart from his ideas about you know the the the self-generation of the baby from the bottom upward using its own reflexes and its own capacity to explore the other thing that piaget was extraordinarily good at laying out and and remarkable at discovering was the role of games and so piaget was the first psychologist i would say who discovered just how important it is to have kids play now the problem with play is that it's fun and so utilitarian people especially ones that are really conscientious have this idea that if it's fun it can't really be good for you and so because of that the role of play in children was not and still isn't appreciated in the full dimensions of its importance so for example you know we take little kids that are in grade one they're like six you know and what do we do with them we put them in chairs like the ones you're in you've been in that damn chair for like 16 years you know it's like we take those little characters and we put them in chairs and we expect them to sit there and listen to adults for six hours a day well it's it's so idiotic that it it's beyond comprehension it's no wonder the little blighters are hyperactive you know that just means they're alive they should be taken out into the schoolyard and supervised while playing until they're completely exhausted then they should have a little nap then maybe you could teach them something for a while but stopping them from playing and or or not facilitating play among them is absolutely crazy because that's exactly how children come to become social in the world and the reason for that is that the games children play are analogs of the activities that adults engage in well it's not that hard to figure it out figure that out if you think about it i mean think about playing monopoly you're a teenager you play monopoly how many people have played monopoly right everybody's played monopoly well what are you doing it's like evil capitalist pig game right so and you know if you're going to grow up to be an evil capitalist pig then you can get a good practice good good practice going by playing monopoly and you can you can become part of the one percent which is what you have to do to win right you need to have all the hotels and so no one else has any hotels and you know you play that and it's fun it's fun so it's an analog of real life now it's an analog of real life in many ways because most of the things that you do with other people involve adhering to a set of shared rules and most of the things that you do with other people involve cooperating and competing with them so if you're playing monopoly are you cooperating or competing how many people think competing okay how many people think cooperating okay you're cooperating are you playing the same rules are you playing by the same rules well yes unless you're cheating if you're cheating you're not playing monopoly right you're cheating that's a different game so to play monopoly you have to cooperate because you have to all agree to sit in the same place you have to agree not to steal the money you have to agree that the stupid rules which are completely arbitrary are the ones that are going to govern your life for the next you know two hours you have to agree to try you have to agree to try to have fun you have to agree to try to be like a good player which means you don't get all snively and whiny when someone when you land on someone's boardwalk and they completely bankrupt you you know so you're cooperating like mad and another thing piaget pointed out which is absolutely lovely is that you can't have a game without cooperation and competition at the same time so there's no such thing as cooperative games you have to have for it to be a game it has to be competition within cooperation or it can be cooperation within competition within cooperation you know these things are very complexly nested so if you're playing hockey for example is is hockey an aggressive game or a or a cooperative game well you have to play by the rules so both teams agree to that you're on the ice at the same time you don't bring a basketball you don't bring a chess game you're there to play hockey are you cooperating or competing with your teammates well both right you're cooperating with them because you want everyone to win plus you want everybody to get better at playing across time but you're competing with them because maybe you could be the star of the game and everybody's happy about that and then with the other team well are you cooperating or competing with them well as long as you're playing by the rules you're cooperating but there's obviously an element of competition now almost every human activity has those elements there's a body of rules underneath it or if they're not rules they're at least social conventions right they're things that people understand are allowed and not allowed and then there's a competitive and a cooperative element all right so that's what children start to become particularly exposed to when they're about three how piaget pointed out that there were in some sense two classes of children's games there was the games that have a really clearly defined aim and that'd be the goal and that'd be like you know in the little circles that we were talking about that's where you're trying to go now the thing about it being a game is that all of you have to be trying to go there at the same time and so what piaget realized was that just as the child is trying to integrate all their little micro games inside them into some sort of unified thing which would be the child a stable personality across time and capable of weathering the storms of life when a group of children get together they build another one of those routines but it includes all of them and so the kids might say well let's play um hide and go seek that's a good one and everyone knows the rules to hide and go seek and you can win or lose it hide and go seek but what you're trying to do is you have to bring your sub personalities all the way up to their integrated state underneath a meta structure that's organized by the collection of children so the child would say well do you want to play hide and go seek and you're supposed to say you're either supposed to say yes or perhaps pause it another game you're not supposed to freak out or get angry or say that that's a stupid game or run back to your mom because then you're not going to be very popular and you're not going to get to play and if you don't get to play well then you're you're ruined because if you don't learn how to play with others between two and four you never learn and then you're some poor outcast and maybe you end up in jail or at least you end up like isolated and and awkward and and poorly socially integrated and that's not good because if you don't get into the kids games at three all of them start moving ahead and you don't and the farther they've moved ahead past you the less likely it is that they're going to play with you so one of the things that's really worth thinking about if you're going to have kids is you have a job as a parent and your job as a parent is to make your child socially acceptable especially to other children by the time they're three and if you don't do that well that's not very good you'll pay for it and so were you a child and you know there's been lots of long-term follow-ups on this sort of thing and it seems pretty evident that if the kid isn't socialized by four then good luck there's no evidence at all from the developmental literature which is quite a dismal literature that you can fix that so anyways all right so the children all get together and they say well here's what we're going to do and everyone says yes and so they orient their personalities towards that goal and then they interact in a cooperative and competitive way in pursuing the goal and that's a game and what they're doing is practicing being social human beings and so and they do that with all sorts of different games and then you might say well here's something really worth thinking about what does it mean to be a functional human being it to me it means to be the sort of human being that can be a good player across multiple games so you might think for example you tell your kid i'll tell you a story about a hockey game that i saw once hockey parents say 10 percent of them should just be jailed as soon as they enter the arena so when my kid played um i don't know what you call it a level high level hockey for a while when he was a kid anyways he was a good he was a good hockey player but it was really unbearable so we didn't do it for very long for a variety of reasons but anyways on his way to learning how to play hockey he was in one of these uh local leagues we have an arena just around the corner fortunately enough and he wasn't the best player on the team there was a another kid on the team who was who was better i would say and uh he uh he was in a championship game at one point he hadn't been in very many championship games because his teams often weren't very good but anyways it was the local championship and we went and watched and it was a really fun game you know like it was really close i think it i think it was three three till the final 15 or 20 seconds and then some kid from the other team scored a really good goal you know it was wasn't one of those things where they accidentally kicked the puck into the net or something it was a really nice play and so it was a tight game the teams were well matched the local league had made sure like they'd set up teams together and then if one team kept winning too consistently or one losing too consistently they'd sort of revamp the team so they were roughly equal which i really liked because you know all the kids got a reasonably equal shot at it and everybody got to develop so anyways we were watching that it was pretty fun and uh the the star kid he was skating around out there and the game ended and he went off the ice and he smashed his hockey stick onto the cement because he was all irritated and you know which was pretty pathetic and then his father came running up to him and said oh you got robbed it was really terrible um you know the reffing was bad and you played very well and you should have won the game and he didn't say you know stop being a little rat and smashing your hockey stick onto the cement like you're three which is what he should have said he he basically rewarded his child for narcissistic uh immature misbehavior so it was pretty pathetic it was child abuse as far as i'm concerned sort of of the psyche really man that's stupid what are you gonna do you're gonna train your child to be a narcissist it's like that course that's child abuse it's moronic of course it was due to his own foolishness but i don't know if that's criminal right but it was really pathetic so but no but think about this now for a minute so you might think well what did that kid do wrong it's like well he wanted to win so that's okay you should want to win if you're playing a game i mean you're not any fun if you're playing a game and you're not trying to win and there's nothing more miserable than playing a game with someone and at the end they say well you won because i wasn't really trying it's like you know you're not going to play with them again if they do that and that's kind of interesting because it means they've done something wrong you know and even a kid can figure that out and so you might tell your kid be a good sport and it doesn't matter whether you win or not it matters how you play the game now what the hell kid doesn't know how to what to make of that and you hardly even believe it right you think yeah it does matter if you win so i don't know what this means but you'll tell the child that and so then you might think well what does it mean to be a good sport and and that and that how you play the game is more important than whether you win or lose okay so think about it this way what's your goal well you might say to win the hockey game but that implies you're only going to play one hockey game what if you can play a hundred hockey games and then forget about that what if you're going to play 100 hockey games and 200 basketball games and 50 chess games and you're gonna have a bunch of jobs and you're gonna have a bunch of friends and you can have a bunch of relationships and all of those have a game-like structure and let's say that you're a real son of a when you play hockey and so no one ever invites you to do any of those other things it's like well you win the game but you lose the metagame and the metagame is the game that's made up of all the games you're ever going to play and what apparent means when they say doesn't matter whether you win or lose it matters how you play the game is that the metagame is more important than the game and you should learn how to play games so that whether or not you win or lose people really want to play with you because if they want to play with you man you're set right so here's here's a cool game so okay you two are going to play this game are you ready okay so here's the deal i'm going to give you 20 dollars you have to give some of that to him you want to get to offer once if he rejects it neither of you get anything okay how much are you gonna give him ten would you take that okay okay you would why i mean like first is better than nothing yes it's fair right yeah yeah so here's this experiment has been done all over the world and so basically what they find is that people pretty much offer 50 50. now here's something cool let's say you go play this game and use 20 bucks and you're playing it with really poor people and so you you set the game up so you say look offer him two bucks he's poor he'll take it so you offer him two bucks what does he do he tells you to screw off right and he's more likely to do that if he's poorer so that's pretty interesting because like a classical economist would say look what you should have done was offer them a dollar it's like you get 19. you get 19. he gets a dollar he's gonna take the damn dollar because it's better than nothing but that isn't what people are like it's like you give them a dollar and you get 19 they want to punch you right they're not going to take that and that's because they don't want to play the game that way they want to play the game so that it's fair across multiple games now you might say let's say you're playing that in front of a whole bunch of people like we were now and let's say all these people are going to be able to invite you to play the same game and so maybe you're going to be able to make 400 in the next hour so then you might say well what should i do if i wanted everybody to invite me to play this game as much as possible then how much would you offer 15 exactly that's cool so that means actually you lost the game the one game right because you only get 15 five and he gets 15 but like everyone's thinking hey i'm going to play this game with her well that's that's what it means when you tell someone to play the game properly you say act as if while you're playing a specific game that there's a higher order moral principle that has to do with the total number of games that you're going to play across your entire life and play that game properly yeah well that's the evolution of higher moral thinking in part from a piagetian perspective it's bloody brilliant so all right we'll see you tuesday you
Okay, so there were a couple of things that I wanted to tell you that were left open in the last lecture. The first one was that I told you that there were two types of games and then I only told you about one type of game, so I know you’ve all been dying of curiosity about that ever since. So, the first type of game that we talked about was the one where every one has a particularly shared goal. You might of that as a structured game. But the second type of game that Piaget was interested in was dramatic or pretend play games. And generally how a pretend play episodes works is that—well a child can always do this by him or herself—but if it’s a group game usually what happens is the kids get together in a little group and they basically script out a little play. And its like—what might you call it? Spontaneous improvisation. You know, and so maybe they’ll play house and they’ll assign, you know, a player to each role and I guess that would normally be mother and father and baby, often, and maybe pet—dog or cat. So, you know, you can be the cat and you can be the mom and you can be the dad. And then they’ll set up a little dramatic arena. Maybe it’s a, you know, like a table covered with blankets, which kids seem to particularly like and then they’ll run through the game. Now, and in some sense what they’re doing is imitating their parents or maybe their pet or maybe the baby, but it’s not exactly imitation, and this is an important thing to note, because imitation would imply—if you’re imitating someone what you’re in sense doing is duplicating what they just did. Now there are robots, for example, now. If you want to teach the robot how to do something, so maybe the robot’s got an arm—in fact it does—you can grab it’s arm and you can go like this. And then as long as you pt can there, the robot will do exactly that, precisely that. So you’re teaching it—it has the capability of imitating movements that it’s already done once. But, you know, when you’re a kid and you’re playing house and maybe you’re being the mother, you don’t precisely duplicate with your body exactly the movements that you saw your mother make maybe the last time you saw her or the last time you were watching her. What you seem to be able to do instead is to watch your mother over long periods of time and extract out something that you might describe as her spirit. And I know that that’s not really a psychological or a scientific word but it’s a useful word because—or you could perhaps say her personality but it’s not her personality exactly because it’s her personality as mother, which isn’t really her personality. It’s the Mother personality and that Mother personality is something that has been practiced by mothers for who knows how long. And what the child seems to do when she, we’ll say for this example, is watching her mother is extract out what the spirit of motherhood is and then embody that, right? And so you might think of the spirit of motherhood as those elements of behavior and perception and emotion and cognition, for that matter—but it’s all of those embodied simultaneously—what’s in common across all the instances of acting like a mother. You know, so you can say, “Well, that’s mother-like behavior,” and who knows what that might be. I mean, what you want to do is conjure up the stereotype roughly speaking of the mother. You know, people don’t really like stereotypes, especially in psychology, but almost all your thinking is in stereotypes so there’s not much difference between a stereotype and a category, you know. Categories are oversimplifications and so are stereotypes. But anyways, so you take—imagine the stereotype of a mother and then the child is acting that out. And what they’re trying to do is to become the mother roughly speaking. So, and why? Well, for obvious reasons. There are obvious reasons why someone would do that. It’s because without mothers there wouldn’t be any human beings and so if we didn’t have successful mothers that would be the end of us and so we wouldn’t be here to talk about it. So, now one of the things that Piaget observed was that this kind of dramatic play was extraordinarily important to children because it helped them learn how to act like they would act maybe when they’re older children or maybe when they’re teenagers or maybe when they’re young adults. It’s a trial run in a relatively safe environment. One of the things I’ve been thinking about, it’s not that easy to precisely specify the role of the father, but I really believe that one of the things that fathers do, if they do a good job of being fathers, is that they circumscribe a safe space within the house or within the familial environment where the children can play free of interference. And so then because play is also a very sensitive behavior, by which I mean that it’s easy to disrupt play in children. If there’s anything wrong with the child they won’t play. So one of the ways that you can tell if your child is doing well is that they’re playing. I mean I suppose you could say the same thing about your dog or maybe even your partner. You know, if they’re in a playful mood then perhaps there isn’t anything particularly wrong with the relationship at the moment and all the needs that might be regarded in some sense as more fundamental have been met. And so to get children to play well you have to circumscribe a safe area and they have to be taken care of. And then they can experiment with different modes of being, and they do that by themselves but they also do that in the company of other children. And obviously what they’re doing is practicing for later roles. And, you know, you see this sort of thing in children at multiple levels because not only will they play out being a parent—that’s a very common element of child’s play—but they’ll also often develop sort of fixations on slightly older children, maybe a year older or two years older, and sort of hero worship them and follow them around and imitate them even more directly than they might imitate a parent. Now obviously the child has his or her reasons for that and the reasons are is they’re trying to advance to the next stage, so they scan the environment; look for something who seems to have done that well, whatever that means, who looks competent and is maybe friendly and can tolerate having a, you know, kid trail along behind them; and they act them out. And so play, all the forms of play that we described—the two basic forms—are extremely important to children. And when you see them pretending, as a parent, one of the things that you should realize is that it’s an extraordinarily important form of activity; it’s how they socialize themselves. Now, the other thing that I didn’t mention—this is concentrating on Piaget as well—is, you know, we talked a little bit in the mythological and shamanic initiation lectures about the idea that human personality evolution is a punctuated, upward development. So you move ahead and then you encounter something that gets in your way, some sort of severe obstacle, and it either blocks you behaviorally so that you can’t get to your goal using your current behavioral plans or it’s even more complex than that and it disrupts the whole structure that you’re using to integrate your behavior across time. You know, so the difference between that would be roughly the difference between say going home to your partner or going on a date with our partner, assuming people still do such things, going out with your partner and them being in an irritable mood. And so what that would mean is maybe you smile at them or you tell them a joke and, you know, it falls flat or that respond in an angry manner and so you’re going to orient to that; it’s going to things fall apart a little bit; you might say, “Oh, the whole night’s ruined.” You probably don’t say the whole relationship has had it, but if that happens enough times you might. But you might say, “Oh, the whole night’s ruined,” or maybe you’ll—which is probably a bit of an overreaction right off the bat. Like my impression as a clinician is that when people are being difficult to get along with you should let them do it three times while you track it, because then the third time they do it you can say, “Look you’ve done this. Here’s what you’re doing.” And they say, “No, I’m not doing that,” and you say, “Ha! Yes you are because I saw you do it then and then, and then.” And then they’re basically screwed; you win right away if you do that. So, but more seriously, if it’s just one little episode it’s best to let it go. You don’t really have any proof and maybe there’s just some, you know, local thing wrong. Three times, that’s a whole different issue because then you’ve got some credibility and it’s a nice balance between being too impulsively reactive—you know, because you should stand up for yourself, right? Well, does that mean that you should respond to every little slight? Well, you’re going to be reacting all the time if you do that, but you don’t want to be a pushover and let people walk all over you. So you have to find some balance between being tolerant, so you don’t have unnecessary fights, and being tough so that you don’t have unnecessary fights, and three is a nice number. Anyways, so you’re out with your partner and they’re being annoying and, you know, you can reconstruct your behavior. Maybe instead of telling jokes you look at your phone and let them calm down or something like that. You haven’t disrupted much of the frame that you’re using to interact with, right? The night, the evening, is still continuing in it’s planned manner; you can still use the perceptual structures and the expectations that were guiding you. They were modified at a very high resolution, minor level. And then, so that’s going to upset you a little bit because you’re going to think, you know, “What’s going on here?” Maybe you’ll think, “Is there something wrong with me?”—if you’re self-conscious you’ll do that—or maybe you’ll think that there’s something wrong with them. Whatever. But it’s not that serious. But then, you know, maybe you’re out with your partner and, you know, some person wanders over—you’re in a restaurant—some person wanders over to the table and says, “Hello,” to your partner. “I didn’t know that you had a girlfriend or boyfriend. You, you know, you didn’t tell me that when we went out last week.” Well that’s going to be a whole different scenario. Right yeah, and you all laugh about that because you know perfectly well that it’s a different scenario. Right, and you might say, “Well, why is the one scenario more disrupting than the other?” and the answer to that is something like: if your presuppositions about the world are arranged in a hierarchy, in a sense, so that the little actions that you take to do something are at the very bottom of the hierarchy, or they’re the micro-details, and then you continue to abstract up all the way to the top, which might be, “I’m in a committed relationship”—now there are levels of hierarchy going from being in a committed relationship to the little actions that you undertake with one another—the higher up you have to go in the hierarchy, the higher up the disruption occurs in the hierarchical level, the more upset you’re going to be. So irritable partner, well you can sort of walk around that; unfaithful partner, well, you know, that’s pretty much up at the top of the hierarchy where you have to start rethinking your past and your present and your future, and maybe you are and who they are and who men are and who women are, and it’s like, it’s really a disaster, right? Everything falls apart. Well, then that’s the little trip to the underworld that we talked about. Now Piaget had an idea like that also with regards to children, because his stage theory is a punctuated theory. One of the things he noted about children was that they would construct a structure and a structure would be—I think again the best way to think about it as is a personality because a personality has thoughts and emotions and motivations and actions; it’s all of those at the same time. It’s this little alive subelement of you, and children are conjuring up these little subelements of themselves that have functional utility, as they build themselves from their motor systems upwards, and now and then they run into a situation where the tools that they’ve built—the subpersonalities that they’ve built—aren’t fulfilling the desired function. So maybe that’ll happen when, you know, a three-year-old goes to kindergarten and isn’t making friends easily. Well that’s going to be—a child’s going to come home after that and cry, fall apart, and maybe be angry, and tell their parents, “No one would play with me.” And, you know, they’ll breakdown; they’ll have tears. And it’s almost as if they switch from a domain where they’re competent. Like, emotion signifies, especially negative emotion, signifies that you’ve moved from the domain in which you’re competent to the domain in which you’re not competent, and if you’re crying, for example, then that’s often a distress signal. Sometimes it’s anger but it’s often a distress signal and it means, “I’ve ended up in a situation where what I know is no longer sufficient to produce the outcomes that I desire.” So you cry and then you get help. People come and say, “Well, what’s the matter?” and they give you a little bat. And, you know, and they console you and maybe they help you strategize about what you could do to make the situation better or how you could act. Or, if you’re a smart parent, maybe you play with your child and offer them—you know, and upgrade their ability to interact socially. Or you take them on additional play-dates or whatever and monitor their behavior and help them reconstruct their little subpersonalities and bring in more information so that it’s more sophisticated. So that would be the Piagetian—so this is a combination of the Piagetian ideas of the Stage Theory, which is movement upward with a punctuation, and that’s the confusion because the previous structure is no longer well-adapted to the world; and then the idea of assimilation and accommodation. Now Piaget kind of made assimilation and accommodation, in a sense, opposites, and it’s not exactly. It’s hard to figure out. But assimilation, for Piaget, is when you pull information in and the structure—the internal structure that you’re pulling it into—doesn’t really have to change that much. And accommodation is when you pull in a fairly mighty piece of information, often negative, and it’s so disruptive that the structure that you’re using to understand the information has to be reconstructed. Now, Piaget thinks of assimilation or accommodation, but I think it’s much easier to think about it on a continuum with the assimilation occurring at the level of micro-behaviors. You know, like if you’re trying to pick up a fork, you know, and maybe your hand’s numb, you try to pick up a fork and it doesn’t work a couple times then you just change your grip and pick it up. Like it’s a little annoying. You’re going to look at the fork and you’re going to try a couple of routines to pick it up but, you know, it’s not going to bring your whole damn world to a halt. You know, so whereas if you find a dead mouse in your soup, well that’s going to be a whole different story, and again it’s a hierarchical issue. And so at the bottom, near the motor structures, I would say it’s easy to assimilate; you just have to make minor changes to the—I like to think about them as maps really; they’re maps or personalities. I know those don’t sound the same but they’re very similar. Depends on whether the thing needs a little adjustment or whether you have to toss the whole thing away and build a new one. You know, it’s the difference between tightening the lug nuts on your car or buying a new car. You can see levels of—you can understand it as levels of difficulty. Another way of thinking about it—you need to know this because you need to understand how it is that you figure out how upset you should get when something goes wrong. It’s a very very complicated question. If you wake up with an ache in your side, how upset should you be? Well you don’t know. It’s like, maybe it’s nothing; maybe you’re going to die of cancer in six months. You don’t know. And so it’s not self-evident how people calibrate their emotions when something goes wrong because the extent of the thing that when wrong is not clearly evident. Your partner’s crabby when you go out for dinner. Does that mean that you’re going to break up in two weeks? Well, it might mean that. So why don’t you just flip out right away because the whole world’s coming to an end. Well, some people do, right, and those would be people who are higher in negative emotion or higher in trait neurotism. Because they’re more likely to react as if a small, potentially small, anomaly or uncertainty or threat or discontinuity or unexpected occurrence is catastrophic, where an emotionally stable person, you know, you might have to say, “I’m breaking up with you,” before they’re going to, you know, look upset and maybe even then it’s not going to bother them that much. So you think of the motor hierarchy, you know, ranging from microbehaviours at the bottom to abstractions at the top and then you can understand how you might compute how upset you get when something goes wrong. Assume that it’s small to begin with. Check at that level. If you can’t fix it at that level advance one level up. If your car doesn’t work you don’t buy a new one. The first thing you do is maybe see if the battery is dead, right, because that’s the path that you could take that would cause you the least amount of trouble. And it’s a really good schema for mental hygiene. It’s like Occam’s razor. You know Occams razor in science, right? Does everybody know what Occam’s razor is? How many people know what Occam’s razor is? Okay, how many people don’t know? Oh, that’s amazing. It’s amazing. Okay, well you should know. It’s really too bad that you don’t know. It’s undoubtedly no reflection on you. Anyways, Occam’s razor is a phrase referring to a principal that was established by an ancient thinker, Occam, and he said, “Does not multiply your explanatory principles beyond necessity.” Okay and so what he meant was: If you have six reasons why something might have gone wrong and you can rank-order them in terms of complexity, pick the simplest one and then until you disprove that stick with it and then go to the next simplest one and so on. And it’s often used as a guiding principle in science where the idea is if you have a simple explanation, don’t complicate it up with a bunch of unnecessary assumptions. And it also might be reflective of a deeper underlying truth, which is that it’s unlikely for any set of entities to be in any particular configuration, but it’s particularly unlikely for them to be in an unlikely and complex configuration. So anyways, so hopefully that’s understandable. You can tangle all those ideas together. At the bottom of your personality hierarchy there are actions; at the top there are abstractions—moral abstractions like, “Be a good person”. When you run into something that’s unexpected, the amount you get upset is proportionate to the level in the hierarchy where the damage appears to be taking place. Now you kind of have to guess at that and partially you do that with your temperament—so if you’re high in neruroticism you guess catastrophe and if it’s low in neuroticism you guess irrelevant—and you do that partly because of the way that you perceive your own competence—you know, because if you’ve encountered minor to major problems in the past, say even if you’re a nervous person, and you’ve solved them you might’ve learned, “Well yeah, it’s a problem but I can fix problems so it’s not really a problem,” which is a really good way to think of yourself. You know, that’s a much better way to think of yourself than, “I’m a person with no problems.” It’s like, good luck with that. But, “I’m a person who could successfully address problems if I concentrated on them”: that’s very very useful. And then the other way that your nervous system sort of decides how upset you should get when something happens is by looking at how other people treat you. And if they treat you like you’re competent then your nervous system gets less neurotic. That’s a good way of thinking about it. You produce more serotonin, you react less globally to indications of error. Okay, so anyways so Piaget: he’s talks about assimilation. Assimilation is when you have to make a little change and accommodation is when the whole damn structure has to be reconfigured, and he thought about those, in some sense, as separate types of learning, but they’re not; they’re on a continuum from very simple to very complex. Have any of you ever heard of the idea of a paradigm shift? How many people have heard of that? Okay, how many people haven’t? Alright, do you know the name Thomas Kuhn? Anybody? No, okay well Thomas Coon was a philosopher of science and he wrote a book in 1962 called “The Nature of Scientific Revolutions”, and Kuhn basically said the same thing about the way knowledge structures proceeded as Piaget said about the progression of knowledge structures within the individual. So Kuhn was concerned about large-scale transformations in scientific viewpoint. So let me give you an example: so in the late 1890’s, physicists were convinced that they were just going to have to shut the whole endeavor down. Why? Well, because the physicists knew everything that there was to know. There wasn’t a single phenomena, at that point, that physicists could not account for except one, and here’s the one they couldn’t account for: So imagine you’re on a train and it’s going that way at half the speed of light. And you shine a flashlight—you’re standing on the top of the train, obviously protecting yourself against the wind, and you shine a light going ahead and you measure the speed of light out of your flashlight. The speed of light is 186 000 miles per second out of your flashlight. Okay, so now you’re on the ground and you’re watching this train zip by. And the guy’s on top of it shining a flashlight and light comes out of the front of his flashlight and you measure the speed of it. What’s the speed? Well, you might think, “Well, obviously it’s the speed of light plus half the speed of light because the train is going half the speed of light and the light is going the speed of light. And so the light coming from the combination of the train and the light is the speed of light plus half the speed of light; that’s what would happen if someone was throwing a ball, right?” But that isn’t right. What happens is it’s the speed of light and no matter how fast you’re going when you shine your flashlight out, the light coming out of your flashlight is going to be going exactly 186 000 miles an hour—I mean a second. A second, sorry. 186 000 miles a second. It’s not additive. And so if you’re on the train and you’re going backwards and you’re shining you’re light, and the person measures it, it’s not the speed of light minus half the speed of light, which is what it would be if your were throwing a ball. It’s the speed of light. Well, nobody knew how the hell to account for that. It’s like, that just made no sense at all but everyone was ignoring it. Well, it turns out you can’t ignore that and that wasn’t the only thing that wasn’t quite well-laid out at the end of the nineteenth century from the perspective of physics, but it was a big one. And to solve that Newtonian physics had to be completely overthrown and quantum physics put in its place. And quantum physics is—quantum physics, you might think of it as a box like this and inside that there’s a box that says Newtonian physics. And so quantum physics can explain everything that Newtonian physics can explain but it explains some more things beside, and so you would say, because of the, it’s a better theory. Now, I might say, “Well, you’ve just made a personality transformation. Are you a better person than you were before?” and you might say, “Well, how in the world can you make a judgment like that?” And I would say, “Well, if you’re a better personality you can do all the things you could do before, just as well or maybe even a little better, plus there’s a bunch of new things you could do. That’s a better personality.” It’s another interesting example of how the idea of better, which really is a moral idea in some sense, better versus worse, you can conceptualize it—well, this is one of the things that Piaget is really really useful for, because it gives you a language that’s grounded in observation and in science to start to handle questions that start to border on the moral. So a better personality can do more than the previous personality could, and you certainly see how that would be applicable to your life. And one of the things I would suggest as a consequence to that is: you know, people always compare themselves to other people, and generally what you do is you compare yourself—you make a little dominance hierarchy out of the people that are right around you. And this is a very annoying propensity because what it means is that no matter how successful you get in your life you’re still going to be in the middle of the dominance hierarchy. So you’ll end up, I don’t know maybe you’ll end up—God I don’t know—maybe you’re CEO of a hundred million dollar company, let’s say. Well, you’d go hang out with a bunch of CEOs and there are ten of them. Three of them are CEOs of a two billion dollar company. It’s like, you’re a pretty little CEO among those people, but who are you going to be comparing yourself to? The guys who pick up your trash? It’s like no. You could but you won’t; you’ll have your little group around you and you’ll be somewhere in the middle. And so that’s useful to know because that means that what you have to learn to cope with is the fact that you’re going to be somewhere in the middle. And then you might say, “Well, how do you cope with that because you should be improving and you also want to be very good at something?” Well, I think the best way to do that, and this is especially true when you’re older, is that you don’t compare yourself to other people; you compare yourself to the previous version of you. It’s a good control, right, because you’ll see, especially by the time you’re about thirty, when you’re young you have to compare yourself to other people because when you’re young you’re a lot like all other people, in some sense, but by the time you’re thirty or older you’re not very much like other people at all. And so, you know, because the conditions of your life start to become so unique and specific to you. Well then comparing yourself to other people isn’t very helpful, but comparing yourself to who you were before: that’s really helpful and you can keep doing that your whole life. And it’s a fair game, right, because the previous you had all the problems and all the opportunities and positive attributes that you have. It’s fair; it’s a fair game and it’ll save you an awful lot of misery. So, alright so Piaget outlined different forms of games and he talked about different ways that those aided in socializations. And you can understand that—I use this “meta” idea, which was the hierarchy of personality, to sort of explain that. From a Piagetian perspective, you put yourself together from your body upward toward increased abstractions, and as you do that you can do more things with your body but you can also do more complex things integrating those things that your do with your body across time and with increasing numbers of other people. Now, Piaget has this really cool idea about what constitutes reality as a consequence of that. So he would say: Alright, so let’s say you can choose Game A or you can choose Game B and you might say, “Well, I want to figure out whether Game A or Game B is a better game because if I’m going to play a game it might as well be a better game.” And he would say, “Okay, so here’s how you can figure out if the game you’re playing is a good one: it’s good for you. Now. It’s good for you now, next week, next month, next year, and ten years from now. So not only is it good for you now, but if you play it repeatedly things get better for you.” Okay, so that’s a game where you’re taking the future into account. It’s not an impulsive game. You know, like cocaine is really good for people for about a day, but over a week or six months or five years it’s a degenerating game. So, and you can’t use your emotion to determine that because cocaine generally suffuses the person who’s using it with a sense of power and possibility. So you can’t just rely on your emotion, no more than you can when you’re tempted to do something impulsive and fun but that might have negative consequences. Okay, so the game should be good now and across the future. And then it should be good for you and it should be good for you and it should for your family and it should be good for your social community and so forth, as you spiral outward, and it should be good for all of those things across multiple expanses of time. And Piaget would call that an “equilibrated game.” Now, there’s another additional idea behind the idea of an equilibrated game which is that if I’m playing a game that’s good for me and it’s good for you and it’s good for you and it’s good for you, then we probably will all be willing to play it voluntarily. And so that’s also why Piaget believed that, in some sense, a game-like structure—let’s say a social structure—that everybody plays because they want to is much better than a game-like structure where everyone plays because they have to. And so he would say, well that’s in part the technical difference between a tyranny and a democracy. And it’s bloody smart thinking. You know, I think Piaget got farther with that idea than anyone else had ever in history, because you can understand—there’s this old idea. It was Hume—another philosopher. What’s his first name? Hume. David? What’s that? David? David! Yes, you’d think I could remember that. David Hume. He has this idea that you can’t derive an “ought” from an “is”. So it’s another one of those principles, like Occam’s razor, and what it means is something like this: No matter how much you know about something that doesn’t mean that you can figure out what you should do about it. So here’s an example: Let’s say, we know AIDS is a problem, we know cancer’s a problem, we know heart disease is a problem, we know poverty’s a problem, etc. There are all these problems. How do you determine how you would allocate resources to those different problems? Well, it’s a very very difficult problem to get at from a scientific perspective, and the reason for that is that well there are all these variables that you would have to equate. Imagine you built a spreadsheet and so you were thinking, “Okay, which is the most troublesome of these things and, you know, which could we solve with the least amount of money.” Well, the problem is is that to determine whether something is troublesome you still have to make a value judgment. Like, there’s no way you can get to the bottom of the problem without introducing the problem of value judgment, and that’s partly why it’s very difficult to derive an ought—what you should do—from an is—what you know. And that’s why there’s a distinction between science and morality or science and religion, that’s another way of thinking about it: is that they’re different domains. Now, Piaget, in some sense, has described a way out of that because he does say, “Well look: a theory that’s better than a previous theory is the theory that explains the same amount and more—and you can apply that to your personality—and a game that’s better than a different game is one that benefits you and more people but it also does that over different spans of time.” Now a game like that’s very hard to compute. You know, when people talk about environmental sustainability what they’re really talking about is a Piagetian equilibrated game where you can live in your family and your family can live in society and society can operate within an economy and the economy can exist within an ecology without having the economy tilt the ecology so that you can’t live and your family can’t live and your society can’t function and the economic system can’t function. So there is this idea of multilevel balance but those things are very difficult to compute, you know. So, but it’s still a nice principle. You know, so if you’re thinking—well, if you need a justification for what you’re doing and you want to put yourself on firm moral ground, which is really useful because then people can’t push you around verbally or intellectually or any other way. Because you’re grounded; you’re standing on something solid. It’s like, you need to know: why is this good for you as if you were someone you were taking care of? Why is good for you across a long period of time? How does it benefit your family? How does it benefit society? And then, you know, you can keep stepping upward from there. So, well I can give you one example of someone who’s doing that, I think. You know about that Dutch kid who’s figured out how to get plastic out of the oceans? Well, he’s not just whining about it and parading around with a sign that says, you know, “I don’t like pollution.” It’s like, as if you need to tell people that, you know, because everyone really doesn’t like—“I don’t like pollution and I’m against poverty.” It’s like, “Yeah, well find someone who’s for pollution and poverty.” Anyways, this kid was about seventeen, something like that, and he was diving around—he’s a diver. I think he was spearfishing and he noticed there was more plastic than fish. And this wasn’t a very happy discovery for him. And then so he started thinking about that: How can we get the plastic out of the oceans? And then he was looking at manta rays, and manta rays have these big wings that help them sort of glide through the ocean. And he about that for a while, and then he thought, “Well, maybe I can build this sort of manta ray thing that lies on the surface of the ocean in a triangle and then it could be towed through the ocean and all the plastic would go to the apex of the triangle. And then you could just scoop it up.” But then he did his calculations and I haven’t got this story quite right but this is basically the story. He did some calculations and found out well, that’s not cost effective because it takes a lot of energy to drag this thing through the water and there’s a lot of water. And, you know, plus you’re polluting like mad while you’re dragging this thing through the water. And so probably it’s just not that helpful. But then he realized that if you go out in the ocean there are there these massive things called “gyres,” which are like huge water hurricanes—except they’re very very very slow moving. But they’re huge; they’re continent size. And so the oceans are already always moving so he thought, “Ha! Since the ocean is moving, there’s no real reason to have to drag the, you know, the plastic or the plastic-gatherer through the water. You could just nail it to the ocean bed with cables and then just have it sit there. And then the ocean would go through all by itself. So, he built a prototype, which wasn’t very big, and he gathered up a fair bit of plastic. All the plastic’s in about the top foot of the ocean by the way, and it really increases in density as you move up towards the top inch. So then he built a bigger one and he got a bunch of—he went on Kickstarter and then he raised a bunch of money. And then he got a bunch of engineers to look at his idea and they said, “Well, you know, this would probably work.” So then they built a big one—a couple of kilometers long—which is now in place off the shore of Japan. They also sent a whole flotilla of people from California to Hawaii to do a garbage estimate, to see how much garbage there was in the water, because there’s a big spot in the middle of the Pacific called the “Great Garbage Spot,” which is full of—or the “Great Plastic Spot?” It doesn’t matter—that’s full of plastic. And so they went to estimate how much there was in it. Anyways, he thinks he can guide this thing to the bottom of the ocean in these big gyres; make it, you know, a hundred kilometers long in a V-shape; put a kind of a collector at the end of it; load all the plastic he collects up of barges; go re-refine that into oil or plastic; and pay for it while he’s doing it. And so you can look him up and I think he’s like nineteen or twenty now. So, you know, that’s a good equilibrated game, right? That works out really well. He gets to make some money, good for him; he gets to employ a bunch of people, that’s a good thing; everybody’s happy about it because, good, you know, we’re getting rid of the garbage; and like there’s no downside. So, you know, it’s hard to say—it’s hard to come up with an argument for why that isn’t a good thing. And it’s good because everyone benefits all the way up. So, that’s an equilibrated state. It’s a very very very smart idea. Okay, now Jung. Experimental psychologists don’t like Jung—well, they don’t like Freud either and they don’t have much time for clinicians in general. But that’s ok: they’re not trying to solve the same problems. Now, usually if you take a personality course, you’ll cover Freud before you cover Jung, and the reason for that is that Freud, in some ways, proceeded Jung historically and lots of people, especially the Freudians, like to think of Jung as Freud’s student. And there’s some truth to that because Freud was the first person who really collected up ideas about the unconscious and formalized them, publicized them, and applied them to the problems of pathology and mental health. So good for him. And Freud was unparalleled at describing pathological families, and there are plenty of those. But Jung was interested in something that was underneath that. I mean Freud got underneath things a lot, you know. He was also one of the first people to point out just exactly how potent sexual and aggressive motives were in shaping the way that we thought. But Jung: Jung was more interested—like, in some sense, Jung was more like a Darwinian biologist. He was much more interested in the biological and psychological philosophical history of fundamental human behavioral patterns. And so Jung wasn’t like a behaviorist. A behaviorist would think when you’re born there’s nothing there except the possibility to learn things; you’re a blank slate. And then everything you learn is a consequence of sensory information that you’re picking up and what you learn as a consequence of that. But Jung, he didn’t think that at all. He thought that there’s a specific human nature, and he set out to understand what that human nature is. Now, a couple of lectures ago I talked to you about the characters that you might imagine making up the world that you inhabit. So I said, well you can think about the absolute unknown, which is the unknown that’s so unknown that you don’t even know it’s there. That’s something that is really really shocking if you ever encounter it, and it’s the sort of thing that you’re exposed to, hypothetically, whenever you go to a horror movie that depends on fear. Right, because horror movies that depend on fear confront you with things that do not behave the way they’re supposed to behave, like inanimate objects that move. You know if all of a sudden you discover an inanimate object that moves there’s a lot that’s wrong with your particular model of the world. And you can kind of experience that in a horror movie because things will do things that they’re not supposed to do, like walls will bleed. That’s just not supposed to happen and so it’s very upsetting to see something like that. But you’re exposing yourself to that in horror movies and trying to—well, you’re trying to develop some courage because God only knows which of your fundamental major assumptions might just turn out to be wrong. So we talked about representations of the absolute unknown, and I suggested that those were often associated with serpentine predators; and then we talked about representations of culture, because every character has to contend with culture, whether it’s a fictional character or you. You’re stuck with it. You’ve got your culture—and some of that’s positive because here you are: you can talk, you can read, it’s warm, you know, you’ve got a bright future ahead of you. And then it’s also a destructive tyrant because it’s ruining the world and all those things that you already know about. And then so that’s culture, then there’s nature because you’re stuck with that too. And there’s a benevolent element of nature that’s usually portrayed with feminine symbols—and that’s the Mother Nature that environmentalists know and love—and then there’s, you know, Mother Nature that gives your mother cancer when she’s forty—and that’s the downside of Mother Nature and you’re pretty much stuck with that too. And then there’s you and, you know, there’s all the useful things about you—the sort of heroic things. Technically, you know, the parts of you that would be able to confront the unknown and to prevail or to confront the tyrannical part of the culture and to prevail. That’s the positive part and then there’s the negative part, which is the part of you that you know very very well that’s always causing trouble for you and other people. And it doesn’t do what it’s supposed to and is resentful and angry and petty and mean and ignorant and blind and impulsive and rationalizing and all of these lovely things that people are more than capable of doing. Now those are all archetypes. And so they’re archetypes because they’re the fundamental personalities that we use to orient ourselves in life. I guess that’s the best way of thinking about it. Now, when Jung talked about an archetype it’s kind of complicated because sometimes he talks about them as instincts and sometimes he talks about them as images and sometimes he talks about them as stories. But the best way to contend with that is to understand that they’re all of those at the same time. So, for example, if you go to a romance—which is a kind of archetypal story—you go to a romantic comedy, say, that means, you know, the protagonists have a love affair and it turns out positively. Romantic comedy: an archetypal structure. Well, what are the characters doing? Well, they’re driven by instinct, obviously, so that’s the instinctive level of the archetype; and then it’s a behavioral pattern because they’re interacting with each other; and it’s a story because someone has selected out the major elements of the events, in the way that would be most engaging to an audience, and portrayed them. So they archetype can be all of those things at the same time. There’s no contradiction; it just makes it a more complex phenomena. It’s best again to think of it as a personality. An archetype is a personality, and an archetypal story is the manner in which an archetypal personality manifests itself across time. And there are lots of archetypal stories, and I can give you a couple of fundamental examples. The fundamental archetype of male behavior is the dragon story—is confronting the dragon. And that’s to go out, confront the dragon, which can be all sorts of things—it can be the absolute unknown; it can be the negative element of femininity, which is a dragon that stops men cold all the time—and usually what happens as a consequence is that the person gets a treasure or gets a girl. Okay, the fundamental female archetype, as far as I’ve been able to tell—it’s a little harder to track down; it took me a long time—is Beauty and the Beast, and the reason I figured that out—there’s a bunch of reasons but I only figured it out about two years ago and I thought, “Yeah, of course that’s it.” I read this book by the guys who do data analysis at Google and it’s called “A Billion Wicked Thoughts.” It’s quite an interesting book, and basically what it is it’s a study of search engine behavior. And, you know, I think about 18-19% of search engine behavior is sexual in nature, and so then you might think, “Well, what are men doing and what are women doing?” Well, we know what men are doing: they’re looking at pictures of naked women, broadly speaking. What are women doing? Ha! They’re not looking at pictures of naked men; they’re reading about sex. So women’s pornography use is literary. And so I thought, “Oh that’s interesting. That makes sense,” because actually women read more fiction than men, by the way. Women are more predisposed to reading fiction. Women seem to be more interested in people than in things, a very stable cross-cultural gender difference. Anyways, so women are reading about sex. And you know that if you buy, if you look at—when I was a kid and on holidays, summer holidays, my mom used to pack along like thirty Harlequin romances. Do you know what a Harlequin romance is? Does everybody know what a Harlequin romance is? Does anybody not know? Okay, most people know? It’s a cheap pulp romance, you know? It’s like deserving young woman meets dashing and somewhat distant guy and he’s already with someone, but she doesn’t deserve him, and then she charms him. And then, you know, he decides that she’s actually the one and then she gets to have him and then everyone lives happily every after. So that’s a Harlequin romance. Now, the original Harlequin romance—they published millions of these bloody things—was just that, and it was a pretty plain, G-rated story. But since the 70’s Harlequin has exploded and it’s gone from, you know, G-rated stories of the sort I told you to like triple-X versions. And they’re all very popular and those sorts of stories are also reflected in female use of the Internet. And so what you see is that they look up Beauty and the Beast stories and there are five major protagonists—and this is something that I think is so absolutely comically it just killed me when I first read it. Here are the five major guys in female X-rated pornography: okay, werewolf, yeah; vampire, yeah; surgeon; yeah; billionaire, yeah; pirate. So, isn’t that funny? Man, it just blew me over, but, you know, it’s not much different, in some sense, than the male archetypal story of confronting the dragon, right? Because—and I’ll show you something from Sleeping Beauty that makes this very clear. I’ll show you that today. Because, you know, if you think about it, so these are kind of bad guys. Well, the werewolf and the vampire in particular, right, but the pirate’s sort of up the too. And you might think, “Well, why would men like that figure in women’s archetypal sexual narratives?” and the answer to that is: well, what the hell good is a man that can’t be dangerous, right? Think about that. And, you know, this bloody theme is played out in romantic comedies all the time; think about it. There’s the girl and she has a friend. He’s a guy. He’s kind of a guy who never grew up. He’s usually—what’s his name? There’s a comedian: Seth Rogan. He’s usually Seth Rogan. You know, and he’s kind of joe everyone and he’s kind of funny and he’s her friend, but he really wants to sleep with her and she knows that. And she knows that he’s not just her friend, and he isn’t just her friend; he just likes to pretend that. You know, and then there’s the guy who she’s interested in who’s not like Seth Rogan and he’s got an edge to him, you know. And then the story usually plays out—there’s an interplay between those three characters. And, you know, the Seth Rogan guy is always going, “Well, why doesn’t why doesn’t she like me?” And the answer is: well, just watch him for ten minutes and you know why. You know, partly because she doesn’t want a friend. She wants someone who’s good for someone, and someone who’s good for something is someone who’s got a powerful edge. And part of what happens in the female archetype is that the female civilizes that, at least in relationship to herself. Ok, so and then, as far as I’m concerned, that’s not much different, as I said already, than the male hero myth. So, I’m going to show you, first, I’m going to show you something from Sleeping Beauty. So let me just find it here. What’s the universal video player? Yeah yeah, that’s the one. Thanks. I’ve got to download it because, well they strip this machine every night, and so you have to always download things over and over. Okay, so let’s talk about the structure of Sleeping Beauty for a minute. So, there’s a king and a queen, and, you know, they live in a kingdom—logically enough. And they’re trying to have a baby and that doesn’t work out very well. And then all of a sudden, you know, after time passes they have this baby girl, and her name is Aurora. So that’s sort of a reference to the sky, obviously, right? And you often see with archetypal characters that they’re affiliated, in some sense, with cosmic phenomena. So, for example, you know, king’s and queens have crowns, right? And then divine figures have halos. Well there’s not much difference between a crown and a halo, and the crown is the sun. The little points on it: those are the rays of the sun. Or it’s the moon. It depends if the crown is made out of gold or silver, because gold is a solar metal and silver is a lunar metal. And so, when something is associated with the cosmos that means that it’s gone from the purely personal to the impersonal or the transpersonal or the archetypal. And the archetypal would be not your father, but the Father as such—like the spirit of the Father; not your mother, but the spirit of the Mother as such. And so, when you have the king and the queen you have the Sun and the Moon. You have the ruler of the day sky and the ruler of the night sky. You have the ruler over everything that the light touches, and you have the transpersonal figures of Mother and Father. Okay, so now you see this in lots of movies and hero stories and comic books. So, the most commonly portrayed pattern is that the hero has two sets of parents, right? Harry Potter: he’s got the Dursley’s, and they make him live under the staircase, and then he has his brother/ cousin. What’s his name? Dudley. What’s that? Dudley. Dudley! Yeah, it’s the long version of “dud.” And, you know, he’s a bad brother, and so they’re actually the archetypal hostile brothers. Harry Potter. Hero and adversary. And then he’s got his ordinary parents, and those are the parents that, well they’re real ordinary: they live in an English suburb and they’re extraordinarily conservative and narrow-minded. They don’t want anything to do with anything to do with anything magic whatsoever. And then he has his Heavenly parents, who are his magic parents. Right, and they come back in spirit form now and then throughout the movie when he really needs them. So, Superman: he’s got his Earthly parents and his Heavenly parents, right? If you go onto Wikipedia and you look up, “Orphan hero,” I think they have 160 of them listed; same motif over and over. The reason for that is, well first of all, when you’re a teenager, one thing you think is, “Ugh, are these really my parents?” Right, and so and the answer to that is yes and no. And it’s yes, in that well, obviously, from a strict immediate biological perspective they’re your parents. But from an archetypal perspective, it’s like, well you have parents going back three and a half billion years. Your parents are just the latest in a very very very long line of parents. And so the reason you call your father “Dad,” or “Father,” or whatever you happen to call him, is because it’s in recognition of the fact that the relationship that you have with him, to some degree, isn’t personal; it’s archetypal. He’s the Father. He plays that role for you. And, you know, you can even tell when he’s playing it properly because you might tell your friends, you know, “I don’t have a very good father.” It’s like, well how the hell do you know that? You know, it’s sort of like you’ve got this idea in your mind about what a good father would be like, and if he’s not doing that then it’s not him—you know, subject to your childhood and teenage misinterpretations. And, you know, “I have an awful mother.” It’s like, well, compared to what? Well, compared to the ideal mother. Well, you might say, “Well, just who is this ideal mother.” Well, you can see her in religious representations all the time. So in Christianity, for example, you’ll see her represented as the Virgin Mary, who’s the perfect mother. And that’s why she’s a holy figure. And she’s a holy figure partly—an archetypal figure, lets say—because any society that doesn’t worship the mother and the infant dies. It has to be sacred because everybody starts—everyone has that relationship, and if the society doesn’t support it properly and value it properly then, well, then there’s something seriously wrong with the society. So, now Sleeping Beauty. King and Queen. Baby. Okay, so we’ve got the familiar triad going there. So then they decide they’re going to christen her; they’re going to name her, and that’s sort of when she becomes an individual. And they make a mistake when they’re going to christen her. And what’s the mistake? Do you remember? How many of you have seen Sleeping Beauty? Yes, and how many of you haven’t. Okay, so of those who haven’t, have you seen other Disney movies? Have you seen other Disney movies? Lion King. Lion King. Okay, anything other than that? No. Okay, is there anybody here who’s never seen an animated Disney movie? Okay, fine. Well, you see how densely—there wasn’t anyone as far as I could tell—you see how densely distributed throughout the culture those stories are, you know, even though they’re very very old stories, but even in their movie form they’re quite old for movies. Okay, so the mistake they make is they don’t invite the evil queen to the christening. And that’s Maleficent. Well, obviously there’s a satanic undertone to that, and you know that because she’s got these black horns that she wears and like she’s got this cape that’s basically on fire. I mean you can tell that she’s an evil person. And so she’s an archetype; she’s the archetype of the negative feminine actually. And it’s a very very smart story. You think, well, why would you invite something like that to your daughter’s christening, especially if you’ve been waiting for her forever and she’s a real princess and everything’s perfect. It’s like, okay here’s another story. So, this is another archetypal story. So there’s these kids and their mother gets—their father, I think—gets divorced, or separates, or his wife dies, or whatever. And so he picks up with this new woman and she decides she doesn’t really like these kids very much. And that happens a lot by the way. So if you have a step-parent, you are 100 times more likely to be physically abused. So it’s the biggest single risk factor. It’s up there with having a drunk parent. So, anyways, a nasty little statistic. You know, it’s hard enough to tolerate kids but when they’re someone else’s kids then it makes it even more difficult. And that’s a Freudian observation and it’s no joke. And people are not that friendly, and there’s terrible jealously. Like, you know, if a man and a women start going out and a woman has children and the man is jealous and the children get in the way, especially if they also bother him because maybe they’re not that happy that he’s not actually their father—maybe he’s just a creep, you know, you never know—well the tension that can build up in a situation like that can rapidly become unbearable and it can last forever. So, anyways so she tells her new husband, “Take those damn kids out in the bush and see if you can lose them,” and so he’s not very happy with this but I guess he’s wrapped around the finger of his new wife and not very bright and kind of evil on his own. And so he takes the children out into the forest and leaves them there. And so this is kind of hard on the children. It’s like they’re out in the wilderness, which is maybe how you feel when your mother dies and, you know, your father goes and marries a new woman. You’re out in the bloody wilderness. And they get lost and then they’re lost and they’re all freaked out because they’re lost. And they’re going to starve and wolves are going to eat them because this is like medieval Europe forest and it’s full of wolves and they eat people. So, and they’re wandering around out there and they come across a gingerbread house. Now, if you’re a skeptical person and you’re not naïve, the first thing you think is, “This is too good to be true.” It’s like, yeah a house: okay fine. A shack maybe, or even a lean-to: sure, that could happen, but a house that’s also made out of candy. It’s like, “Nah, there’s something going on there that’s not so good.” You know the kind of person that’s really nice to you but really isn’t? You remember again the Harry Potter series? Remember that woman? She was a bureaucrat. She had all those plates of kitten. Umbridge, Dolores. Umbridge, Dolores. Dolores means sad, right? Umbridge means to take offense. So she’s the sad woman who takes offense. And she’s got all these pictures of kittens on her plates, right? They’re on ceramic plates. And so those are like hyper-sentimental. It’s like, “Oh, aren’t they cute? And they’re on plates and everything and we’ll put them on our wall,” and, you know, it’s like really low-end taste. And the sentimentality is a facade. Jung would call that a persona of benevolence. But remember old Dolores Umbridge. She’s not exactly your benevolent type. In fact, you know, let her loose on the world and horrible things happen. And what’s her name? The woman who wrote Harry Potter. She got that exactly right. It’s one of her best characters, I think. So, she’s got that, you know, fake voice that often hear people who actually don’t like children use when they’re talking to children. “Oh! Aren’t you just the cutest little thing?” It’s like, you know, you can actually talk to children and they actually like that. And then they don’t think that, you know, you’re possessed by something that they should run anyway from as fast as possible. Anyways, so Hansel and Gretel. The woman comes out and she’s all nice. And she says, “Oh, children, you’re lost in the forest. Why don’t you come in and have some gingerbread.” And so then she puts little Hansel in a cage—like a bird-cage I think—and she gets Gretel to do all the slavery stuff, you know. So she’s not so nice. And then every day she’s stuffing them well with gingerbread and then she goes and feels little Hansel’s legs so that he’s nice and plump so she can throw him into the stove and eat him. And what that means is: beware of people who are too nice to you because what they’re trying to do is devour you. And it’s the prime dictum of Freudian psychopathology. If you have a parent—now Freud concentrated mostly on mothers because mothers are more likely to do this. Because for a variety of reasons that we’re not going to talk about—probably because they are oriented towards babies but whatever. If you’re too nice to your child and you do everything for them, what happens to them? Well, then they can’t do anything for themselves. And so then what happens? Well, then they live in your basement until they’re fifty. You know, and then they get irritated one day and they shoot up Dawson College. So there’s a deep metaphor in the story, and the story is if it’s too damn good to be true it’s probably aiming at your destruction. Okay, now back to Sleeping Beauty. So, Sleeping Beauty, Aurora, is going to be christened, and they decide not to invite the evil queen to the christening. Now, that’s not a very good idea. One time I had—this is a composite client—so this person, all she wanted to do was sleep. So she’d sleep like sixteen – seventeen hours a day. And she was doing that partially with sleeping pills, because it’s hard to sleep that much, but left to her own devices she would just sleep. Now, you might say, “Well, why would someone want to do that?” and then you could say, “Well, for the same reason that people drink themselves into unconsciousness and oblivion.” Which is like it’s painful to be conscious, especially when your life isn’t going that well and maybe you’re afraid of things, and so why be awake and suffer when you can be unconscious and not suffer? And so that was basically her idea. And she was a vegetarian and she was terrified of butcher shops and she was terrified of raw meat. And that was logical because she was sort of terrified of life, and if you’re going to be terrified of life, if you really think about it it’s the whole bloody raw meat part of life that you’re more or less terrified by. So that was very concretized in her situation. And so I used to take her to supermarkets through the raw meat section because that’s what you do in psychotherapy. In case any of you want psychotherapy, you have to do the thing you least want to do, and so that’s not particularly fun. That’s the gateway to enlightenment: you walk through the gate that you least want to. Well, so now you why people aren’t enlightened; because it’s not all fun and games and follow your bliss and all that nonsense. It’s like figure out what you’re afraid of and avoiding and confront it voluntarily. So anyways, I got a little background from her and her mother, who I met—who was definitely the evil queen—I mean she yelled at me for like forty-five minutes in my office. It was really quite remarkable. I hadn’t had anyone—I’ve only had one other person yell at me in my office ever, and she was also definitely an evil queen. But this woman, she was just something else. Like it was just jaw-dropping to watch her perform. And she used to phone up my client all the time, three or four times a day, and tell her how stupid and useless she was. And so if you have parents that phone you up every day and tell you how stupid and useless you are, then it’s perfectly within your rights to not talk to them because that isn’t what they should be telling you. So then you can say, “Well, how about if I call you, instead of you calling me, and how about if it’s once every two weeks, instead of three times a day, and how about if you say anything nasty I just hang up and then I just don’t talk to you for a month.” And then you might say, “Well, I couldn’t do that to my mother,” and I would say, “Well, that’s because she already won.” So anyways, this girl, her mother loved her to death when she was little; she was perfect. She was a princess when she was little but then of course she hit puberty. You know, and then that’s the end of the whole princess thing because then of course you want to go out and have a life and maybe associate with boys and do all that sort of things that’s not the least bit child-princess like. And that’s when everything broke down and started to go in a very very bad direction. And that was partly because her mom didn’t want to invite the Evil Queen to her little daughter’s life, because the Evil Queen is like the negative part of nature. And like, if you have a little girl, well the probability that she’s going to grow up and be a teenager and then a woman is pretty high unless you do something to seriously interfere with that, which you might. And so you bloody well better be prepared for that when she’s three and not treat her like she’s someone who’s feet are never going to touch the earth. You have to have the whole element of life in there. I had another client. Her parents taught her that adults were angels—and I don’t mean metaphorically; they actually taught her that. And, in doing so, they set her up for serious post-traumatic stress disorder, which she had for about five years, because she ran into someone, who wasn’t an angel—surprise surprise—and all he did to her, roughly speaking, was look at her like he wanted to kill her. And you think, “Well, nobody can be traumatized like that.” It’s like, “Well, A, probably no one’s ever looked at you like that, so don’t be so sure; but B, if they did look at you like that AND you thought that adults were angels, then you were pretty much nicely set up to have post-traumatic stress disorder. So, anyways you might think that you’re doing your children a big favor by keeping the Evil Queen out of their nursery, but, you know, you might let them see a glimpse of her now and then so they can get used to the fact that she exists. You know, and I guess that’s why children have pets in part. Like mice: they don’t last very long. So you have a live mouse for a while and then you have a dead mouse, and that’s not very good. But then there’s some things that you get accustomed to while you’re doing that, and maybe it’s not so good to protect your children from that because they’re going to have to grow up and survive in the awful world. And your job isn’t to make them happy. Your job is to make them able to survive in the nasty real world. Anyways, okay so that’s what happens with Sleeping Beauty at the beginning; it’s like Hansel and Gretel. And then the Evil Queen shows up anyways, because good luck keeping her out of your house, and she basically says, “Yeah, well that’s all well and good. You know, there’s nothing I can do about it but come puberty, roughly speaking…” In the Sleeping Beauty [story] she’s going to prick her finger on a needle on a spinning wheel. So there’s blood involved there so we don’t have to use our imagination too much to imagine what that means. It’s like, “I’m going to come back and then all hell’s going to break loose.” And, of course, then the parents really protect her, which is exactly the wrong thing to do, and well, that’s the Sleeping Beauty story. Of course the Prince comes along and he eventually figures out how to solve this problem, right? She needs him, he’s a pretty good guy, then the Evil Queen puts him in a dungeon—it’s like her basement—and then she’s going to keep him there until he’s so old that he can’t even ride and she’s going to laugh at him as he tries to leave. And then he tries to leave and she turns into a dragon. It’s like, “What the hell? Why is she turning into a dragon?” But you accept that. It’s no problem. “Of course the Evil Queen turns into a dragon. What else would she do?” And then she, you know, spouts fire at him and he fights her off. And then he has to hack his way through all the thorns and thistles that have gathered around the castle. And then he wakes the girl up and the fountains come back on and everyone’s happy. And you all think that’s an excellent story. So, and it is an excellent story, but it’s a weird story because it’s an archetypal story and you understand it at an archetypal level. I mean let me show you some of it and then I’ll talk a little bit more about it. So let’s look at the beginning to begin with. Oh yeah. Sorry. This is a class so I don’t want you to actually enjoy the movie. So I’m going to play around it a bit. Okay, so tell me about the book. Is it a valuable book or not? How do you know? Gold. Hey! It’s covered with gold and jewels so you can get a hint right there that there’s something valuable about this. Let’s see if I can do this properly. Yeah, that’ll do I guess. Yeah, it’s a valuable book; it’s got gold and jewels. Why are—why is gold valuable? It’s rare. Yeah, it’s like the sun; looks like the sun. What else? It’s morally pure, gold. Why? It represents wealth? It does. Well, it is wealthy. But it’s morally pure because it won’t mix with other metals. It doesn’t mate with other metals. It’s imperishable and it doesn’t tarnish, so it’s a symbol of purity. And jewels: why are they beautiful and valuable? Forget about rare. They’re shiny? Yeah, they’re shiny! But even crows can appreciate that. So, like what does shiny have to do with it do you think? Sun. Sun. Yeah, it reflects light, right? So what do you want a good person to do? Well, maybe you might say that… Shine like the sun. Yeah, yeah. They reflect light. And the reason—it’s interesting, eh, because the reason that crystals are the way they are, translucent and reflect light, is because their internal structure. A crystal is a lattice of molecules and then that lattice is precisely replicated everywhere in the crystal, so it’s one thing all the way down to the molecular level. And so one of the things that you might think is that if—especially if you think about that hierarchical model that we were talking about—is that if you were as well put together as you could be, and had maybe been subject to the right amount of heat and pressure, that you would be the same thing at every single level of being. And then you would be solid and crystalline and you would reflect light. And so anyways, you get a hint right off the bat that this story is valuable. In a far away land, long ago, lived a King and his fair Queen. Many years had they longed for a child, and finally their wish was granted. A daughter was born and they called her Aurora. Sweet Aurora. Yes, they named her after the dawn for she filled their lives with sunshine. Then a great holiday was proclaimed throughout the kingdom so that all of high or low estate may pay homage to the infant princess, and our story begins on that most joyful day. On that joyful day. On that joyful day. Joyfully now to our princess we come bringing gifts and all good wishes to re-pledge our loyalty anew. Hail to the Princess Aurora. All of the sultans and orphans. Hail to the King! Hail to the Queen! Hail to the Princess Aurora! Health to the Princess! Wealth to the Princess! Long live the Princess Aurora! Hail Aurora! A son and heir to Stefan’s child would be betrothed. And so, to her, his gift he brought and looked unknowing on his future brother. Thou most honored and exalted Excellencies: the three Good Fairies! Mistress Flora… So these are the good elements of the feminine here and they give her various gifts. Sweet Princess, my gift shall be… Why, it’s Maleficent!] What does she want here?] Well, quite a glittering assemblage, King Stefan. Royalty, nobility, the gentry, and, oh, wow quaint, even the rabble. I really felt quite distressed at not receiving an invitation. You weren’t wanted. Not wanted? Alright, well we’re out of time. I’ll show you a bunch more of this next class and we’ll see what it means.
Okay, so we’re going to wrap up Freud today. So Freud occupies a strange position in the history of psychology, because Freud wasn’t a psychologist, he was a medical doctor. And many of the people whose theories we’re discussing were clinicians, were MDs, not psychologists. Well of course when Freud was around, at least when he was training, psychology hadn’t yet become an independent science. Now the same was true of Jung, and part of the consequence of that was that when the new science of psychology developed into what you’re studying today, the psychoanalysts and the medical community basically stayed outside of that. And there’s never really been a meeting of the minds between experimental psychologists and psychoanalysts. Although, by the 1980s, the cognitive psychologists were promoting their discovery of the cognitive unconscious, which always felt to me a little bit ungrateful, given that Freud had actually laid the groundwork for the theory of the unconscious and elaborated that in quite great detail, you know, almost a hundred years before. There’s some resistance (and that’s what a psychoanalyst would say) among the experimental psychology community to credit Freud with any of his real discoveries, and I think that’s very unfortunate, partly because a) he did make the discoveries, and b) the psychoanalysts still understand more about the nature of the unconscious than modern experimental psychologists. Because modern experimental psychologists insist on viewing the brain as a cognitive process, or something like a computer, and that isn’t what it is. It’s a living system composed of other living subsystems. And that means that, as we’ve discussed already, the human psyche and its subordinate components are better conceived of as personalities and sub-personalities than in any other manner, than in systems or than in information processing machines. It’s… I think perhaps the most fundamental accomplishment of psychoanalysis, following Nietzsche, actually, to view the human mind, the human psyche, as a place of relatively integrated sub-personalities. I mean, even when modern people talk about themselves, they talk about the ‘I’ (which would roughly be the ego, in Freudian terms), they tend to think of themselves as a unitary phenomenon. But the problem with that notion is that people continually do things… they find themselves doing things that in principle they don’t want to do, or things that they’re ashamed of, or lying when they don’t want to lie, or generally misbehaving. And it’s also, of course, everybody’s observation that you can try to tell yourself what to do, but that doesn’t work very well. So you know, you’ve experienced this, undoubtedly in your own life many, many times, when you’re sitting down and you’re trying to study for something, particularly if you’re not very interested in it, then all sorts of alternative possibilities will make themselves manifest in the theater of your imagination. And in a sense what’s happening in those situations is that parts of you that are organised around other goals or, from the Freudian perspective, say, driven by other desires, are trying to hijack control of your motor output. And that frequently happens, so that you find yourself, for example, procrastinating, or rationalising, or displacing (those are all Freudian concepts). A displacement would be, instead of doing the work you’re supposed to do you go off and do some other work. You know, it’s not a bad way of procrastinating, but it’s not great, because you’re not focusing on what you should be focusing on. And so, in some sense, you’re at war with yourself. And the major player in the war, at least in principle, is the ego, and that would be equivalent to Freud’s conscious mind, at least in the initial stages of his theory. It’s somewhat complicated to talk about Freud because of course his theory developed across time, and in the beginning, he basically broke the mind up into the conscious mind and the unconscious mind. And you can think of the conscious mind, well that’s you, essentially, that’s the you that you can refer to during day to day experience. And then the unconscious mind is a storehouse of two broad classes of phenomena. And one would be drives that are grounded in instinct, that are either at odds with your current goal, or memories, often traumatic, that you haven’t been able to integrate into your conscious framework. And so those pesky things take on their own life. You know if you take an animal and you take out increasingly large segments of its cortex, say, the animal still organises itself into that animal. Like it starts to lose function, especially if you go deep into the brain (and you can kill an animal if you go deep into the brain), but if you stay on the cortical surface, you can take an awful lot of brain tissue out without interfering with a lot of the animal’s ability to sustain itself. And what that shows is that the brain is organised in such a way so that isolated components of it will take on a function of the entire personality. And that’s demonstration, in some sense, that the sub-elements of the psyche, or perhaps sub-systems of the brain, can organise themselves into functional living units. And it stands to reason. I mean, if you lose an arm you don’t stop functioning. You just reorganise your personality minus the arm. And if you have only managed to integrate a certain subset of the potential psychic manifestations of your mind, then that subset is going to formulate the main personality, but all the other things you’re ignoring or can’t integrate, they’re going to have a life of their own. They don’t just disappear. And so, Freud offers the unsettling idea that you’re by no means master in your own house. And one of the ways you can determine that is by watching yourself do things that you don’t want to do. And those are things, for example, that you’d have a hard time facing up to, because of course most of the things that you don’t want to do are things that you might be ashamed of or anxious about. And then of course there’s the defeat that you suffer when your ego is hypothetically in control of the circumstance and you find your behaviour or your thoughts directed in some direction under the control of something that you think that you’ve mastered. You can really see this in conditions like anorexia. Especially if it’s accompanied by bulimia, which it often is. So anorexia is an eating disorder that causes people, I think essentially, to become extremely disgusted with their own physiology, with their own physical being. And it warps their perceptions terribly. So I had an anorexic client at one point, and she was a rather small woman, maybe 5’2” or something like that. Quite thin, obviously, she had anorexia. And I asked her when she was in my office if her thigh was bigger or smaller than mine. And she said well it was about the same size. So I took a piece of paper and I sat on it and I drew the outline of my thigh on it, and then I had her sit on the same piece of paper and she drew the outline of her thigh. And of course, there was probably that much space on both sides between the two outlines. Well she probably looked at that for fifteen minutes. You know, she could not believe that that could possibly be the case. And I think what happens in anorexics is that they stop being able to look at their whole bodies. So when you look at yourself in the mirror, you kind of have to look in a Gestalt manner, you have to get a picture of the whole. Alternatively you can focus on small parts, but the more you focus on parts, the more difficult it is to see the parts in relationship to the whole. And anorexics get unbelievably focused on small elements, and they confuse themselves. So for example, if they’re looking at their arms and there’s some flesh on it, they are unable to make a distinction between flesh and fat, and they want no fat, they want to go right down to the bone. And they can’t… because they’re concerned about that tiny little part or maybe this tiny little part, or wherever they happen to be focusing, they get completely unable to perceive their own bodies. And it’s quite striking how far that can go. And then the bulimic end of it is, well, the person will starve themselves for a long period of time, and of course, we’ll think about this in modern physiological terms, feeding behaviour is regulated by the hypothalamus, and that’s an ancient brain region that controls fundamental biological systems. And it’s right above the spinal cord and it’s a very, very, very powerful centre of control in the brain. It’s functional enough, and I think I told you this before, that if you take a cat and you cut off its entire cortex, and even most of its emotional systems, if you leave it just with the hypothalamus and spinal cord, which means it almost has no brain, it can organise its behaviour almost perfectly, as long as you keep it in a simple environment. So anyways, the anorexic attempts to starve but… so that’s a conscious goal, you might say, or an ego-related goal, or you could even think about it as a goal that’s motivated by other unconscious forces, because she doesn’t know why she wants to starve, but in any case, what generally happens is, she’ll run into an emotionally upsetting situation. Now emotional upset, it makes you anxious, or puts you in emotional pain. That activates higher brain centres than the hypothalamus, but they’re still pretty low, they’re still pretty primordial. And one of the things that kind of emotional upset does (let’s call it stress) is shut off your long-term planning. And the reason for that is that if you’re stressed in the immediate now, your body and brain presume that you should devote… divert resources from the hypothetical future to solving the problem that’s right in front of you, and that’s often a more behaviourally oriented solution, like freezing or withdrawing, or something like that. So it shuts off your pre-frontal cortex. Well as soon as that happens, then the hypothalamus, which is, as I said, a very powerful system, just reaches up in some sense and dominates the person. I mean, it’s been there for God only knows how long, you know, tens of millions of years, and its job is to stop you from starving to death. And you know, you can imagine that over the course of evolutionary history anybody who had a relatively weak feeding instinct died. And so they weren’t our ancestors. And so what happens to the bulimic is, something will upset them, and then they’ll get an uncontrollable desire for often something that’s high-calorie and sweet and full of fat, logically enough, because they’re starving, and then they’ll eat a whole quart of ice cream and two loaves of bread. And you know, they describe the state that they’re in while they’re doing that as dissociative. You know, it doesn’t feel like them. Well you can imagine why, in some sense. It partly is the whole realm of eating behaviour. And eating is a sub-personality, it’s not just a behaviour and it’s not a drive. When you think about when you’re hungry, it’s not like your brain is moving you literally step by determined step. It’s that you start fantasizing about food and you start thinking about what you maybe want and then you start to make plans about where you’re going to go or how you’re going to cook it and what social surround there’s going to be and a whole bunch of things, and that’s the hungry you. Well in an anorexic or a bulimic, the hungry part of the person is so dissociated from the ego part, that they’re basically in a war. But one of the problems with being in a war with your hypothalamus is that it almost always wins. And it’s a good thing, because otherwise you die. And lots of anorexics do manage to starve themselves to death. And so that’s a good example of just exactly how dissociable the mind can be. And the mind is also… the brain is dissociable in the strangest possible ways. So here’s an example. I don’t remember the name of this syndrome, it might pop into my mind. So you can have a particular kind of stroke, and here’s the effect of the stroke. You develop the fixed delusion that a person who’s very close to you (Capgras syndrome) has died or been kidnapped, or somehow disappeared, and has been replaced by their exact double. And so it’s obviously something… it manifests itself as something akin to psychosis. And what happens is that the stroke damages the relationship between, generally, the visual systems that identify faces and the emotional systems that tag the identified face with familiar emotion. So basically what happens, let’s say it happens to you and it’s your mother… you look at your mother, but it isn’t your mother. You know, your mother comes with a whole complex of memories, and you know, she’s set in a very broad context of memory and emotion. And then you look at this person, and it looks like your mother, but none of that is happening. And so then you develop this idea that well, if it’s not my mother and looks exactly like my mother, well then what could possibly be going on? And the answer is well obviously she’s been taken away and replaced by her exact duplicate. People get into real trouble with this sort of delusion, as you might imagine, because they get obsessed with trying to solve the problem: what did you do with my mother? And you can understand why but here’s a weirder thing, which is that it’s modality-specific. So that if they listen to their mother on the phone, that’s their mother. So you see exactly how dissociable the brain is, the mind is. Even down to small sub-functions. So there are people with strokes who can sing but who can’t talk. And there are people who lose nouns and there are people who lose only verbs. And there are people who can identify things but they can’t name them. So the idea that the brain is a dissociable entity is obviously correct. And here’s another example of it. Well you dissociate all the time. Now if you look at the way the brain is structured. So there’s a strip right about here called the motor strip. And if you’re doing brain surgery and you touch someone with an electrode on that strip they’ll move the corresponding part of the body. And the hands are very, very over-represented, and so is the face and the lips and the tongue, for obvious reasons. We fiddle around with the world a lot, we move our arms and our hands a lot. The feet are over-represented too. And then we communicate about that with our face and our tongues. So there’s huge representation there. And if you touch that you get motion, or at least the person will describe a strong impulse to move. Well out of that grew the pre-frontal cortex. And the best way to think… people think about that as the substrate of abstract. It’s not really a good way of thinking about it, because you’re not really out to think. You’re out to act. And the reason you think is so that you can try out some actions in a little world of fantasy before you implement them in your behaviour. So to think things through means to conjure up an abstracted world and then to conjure up a representation of yourself acting in that world to calculate the consequences and then to decide whether you’re going to implement it. Well that’s another form of dissociability. Because you could think without acting. Now, you know, it’s certainly that part of you that’s able to conjure up the alternative worlds that human beings seem to particularly identify with, you know. That part that’s thinking… at least modern people really think of the part that’s thinking as them, or the part that’s capable of conjuring up abstract ideas. And if it wasn’t dissociable you’d just act out everything you thought. Well that wouldn’t work very well. So the brain is actually designed, in many ways, so to speak, to be dissociable. So if you understand that, and then you understand the two sets of phenomena that are likely to be dissociated, then you kind of got the essence of Freudian theory. And the things that are likely to be dissociated are 1) memories that were traumatic, and I’ll talk about that in a minute, and 2) impulses… they’re not impulses, they’re not even drives, which was the Freudian way of thinking about it, they’re sub-personalities… troublesome sub-personalities. And you can imagine that those would be linked to complex positive and negative emotions. One might be resentment, guilt, shame, anger, anxiety, jealousy, rage, lust, all of those emotions are difficult to integrate into a personality properly, partly because, in their pure manifestation, they’re not… they disrupt the social order. So like, think about how well regulated all of you are sitting here. You think, well you’re… it’s six million years since you diverged from chimpanzees. If we took a bunch of chimpanzees that knew each other as well as you know each other, this place would be an absolute brutal massacre. So, you know, for whatever reason, you can control your primordial instincts, that’s one way of looking at it, that’s how Freud would look at it, you learn to control them. And Freud’s theory, and this is where it differs from the theories that we talked about earlier, say with regards to Piaget, Freud’s theory is really more about control. He thought of all these potential sub-systems and memories conflicting with each other. Like a war. Like a Hobbesian war. So Hobbes was the philosopher who said that life is nasty, brutal, and short, and that in this state of nature everyone is at war with everyone else. And so you need a Leviathan, a top-down control system, who will punish any deviance from the social contract. Well that’s the Freudian super-ego. Now Freud thought of the unconscious and the conscious mind to begin with, but later he dissociated that up into id, ego, and super-ego. And then he thought that each of those had their unconscious elements. So you, if you’re under the grip of an id-related sub-personality, let’s say, you could be conscious of that, but there’s the possibility for all sorts of other id-related sub-personalities to emerge, so those would be in your unconscious. And it’s also possible, and highly likely, in fact, that the way that you’re perceiving the world and the way you’re acting in it, and even what you state as your goals are influenced in ways that you don’t understand by the action of these unconscious systems. So for example, maybe some of you are headed for medical school, and if I ask you why you’ll give me six humanitarian reasons, but the actual reason is because your grandmother would be disappointed if you weren’t. And she might not even be alive anymore, you know, she may have… your mother may have imitated your grandmother so that that ideal is firmly embodied in her, and that set up the unspoken expectations about your behaviour ever since you were a tiny child. So that’s an interesting sub-element of psychodynamic theory too, and it’s really something to watch for in your personal relationships. It’s very, very frequently, if you watch carefully, that you can see someone, especially someone you love, because you have to know them well, being taken over, in some sense, by the spirit of one of their ancestors. And I don’t mean this in a metaphysical way. I mean that the thought… the personality of the grandmother or the personality of the mother has a structure that’s well-known to the individual in question, and that individual spent a lot of time imitating them in all sorts of ways. And those imitated structures can be passed down generation to generation. I mean in fact, that’s partly what constitutes your culture, right? It’s the imitated personality of all of your ancestors that constitutes your culture. And those things can possess. Ideologies possess you in… not exactly the same way, but in a similar way. Okay, so you’ve got the id, and you’ve got the ego and the super-ego. And, as in the Hobbesian worldview, there’s real tension between them, so that the id is always trying to get its base gratifications, its base desires gratified. Now, in Freudian times, that was mostly problematic in relationship to sex. And the reasons for that are quite clear. There was no valid birth control, there was very little employment option for women, so their sexual behaviour had to be very, very tightly regulated or they’d fall outside of the social structure into prostitution, or something like that, and then there was the threat of various venereal diseases, most particularly syphilis, which is as awful a disease as you can imagine. It can imitate or mimic all sorts of other diseases, and it’s transmissible from mother to child. So it’s a nasty one. So it was very difficult for the Victorians to integrate sexuality, because well, exactly how did you do that? The one pathway to potential integration, something the super-ego would approve of, was a martial pathway. But you know, people back then, back in the 1960s, people were getting married around 19 or 20, but that’s actually a historical anomaly. I mean, typically speaking, in the Victorian age, a man usually couldn’t afford to get married till he was in his mid-to-late twenties, he just didn’t have the resources. Women were married usually younger than that. But so there was a long period of time, for men particularly, but also for women, where the sexual drive, from a Freudian perspective, was fully flourishing, fully manifesting itself, but there was no socially approved mode of expression. And so, under those conditions, there’s a war between the id and the super-ego, and the poor little ego is crushed in the middle. Now you could certainly see that when we were watching the movie, the Crumb brothers movie, because they were basically in the same situation. There was no socially approved way that they could manifest any sexual or any aggressive behaviour. And what happened as a consequence was that both of those fundamental sub-personalities, let’s call them, become incredibly pathologised. Particularly characterised by resentment and the desire for revenge. Because remember these systems think… if someone’s excruciatingly sexually frustrated, let’s say, and let’s think about it in the broader scheme of things, because sexuality isn’t really… it’s not a narrow uni-dimensional drive. You know, it’s associated with playfulness, and it’s associated with the desire for social contact, and the desire for communication, and the desire for touch… like it’s a complicated, multi-branching phenomenon. Well, in the case of the people who we were watching in the movie, none of that was either integrated into their personalities, let’s say, or permitted by society. And so it was bent and warped and frustrated and then generated all sorts of ideas about resentment and revenge around it. So you can develop an incredibly pathological sub-personality. In the one cartoon if you remember, it was the one that was most disturbing, where Mr. Natural brought Robert that headless woman. So he wanted pure gratification without responsibility. So it’s a really id driven phenomenon. So he had intercourse with her and immediately after that was unbelievably guilty. And you can see… so you think about what that must mean. It’s like someone is under the grip of one sub-personality, and it’s shaping all of their thoughts and their memories and their emotions. And all of a sudden that becomes gratified, so it’s satiated, it disappears and bang, up comes the other one. And in this particular example it was guilt and shame and anxiety, terror even, and self-loathing, all of those things. And if you read about the experiences of people who commit particularly atrocious crimes, it’s very, very common for them to experience exactly that. They’re driven by sexual/aggressive impulses, because those are the ones generally that culminate in particularly atrocious individual crimes. And then they’ll commit them and instantly flip back into their normative personality, except they’re absolutely terrified by what they did. And you know, it’s… more than one person is inhabiting the same psyche. Now, they’re tied together by memory, generally speaking, although Freud would say you can also dissociate memory. And so Freud talked about memories being repressed. And that’s caused an awful lot of trouble, for a whole variety of reasons. Because memory is not the objective recording… it’s not the objective unbiased recording of actually occurring events. First of all because you can’t objectively record certain kinds of events, like we talked about this before. You can’t really objectively record a discussion between a man and a woman who’ve been married for 20 years about anything important because for them, each word and each phrase and each sentence and each facial expression has to be interpreted within the context of the entire relationship in order for the meaning of the utterances to be extracted. And there’s just no way you can record that in a video. You’d have to have videoed the entire relationship. And so you’re not going to do that. And so memory is a very, very peculiar thing, and the idea that you could have an objective record is not a very sophisticated idea. Anyways, Freud idea, in some sense… he had a somewhat… I hate to say… it was an insufficiently sophisticated notion of what memory was. Now I hate to say that, because Freud was a very sophisticated person. But he did, in some sense, believe in the existence of an objective interpersonal world. And so he thought that if something terrible happened to you when you were a child, that you had a record of the memory. It was there, as the memory, as the event. And then you needed something that would, like a censor that would repress that, and then you needed a place for it to be repressed into, which would be the unconscious. But if you take apart a traumatic memory, generally speaking, with someone… sorry, he [Freud] also thought that repressed memory might be represented in a symptom, a symbolic symptom. So I think that the repression theory suffers from the inadequacy of its representation of memory, because here’s a different way of thinking about it. It’s more in keeping with the layer model, a hierarchical layer model that we’ve been entertaining as we’ve progressed. So imagine that you’re molested by your uncle, because it’s usually a family member, when you’re four. Sexually molested. Okay, the first thing you have to ask yourself is just exactly what kind of memory do you have? Imagine you’re completely sexually naïve, which basically means you know nothing about the sexual act, and its implications, or the mechanics, but this happens to you. So the first question is, how do you represent that? Because to remember something you have to represent it, that’s the thing. Because you don’t just have a memory of the event. It’s always interpretation, because there’s so many things going on. Well so, maybe your representation is pain and confusion, something like that. And then there’d be another layer over that, which would be the necessity for secrecy. Because of course, the person who does the molesting is going to tell you, well one of two things, three maybe: it’s good for you, you asked for it, don’t tell anyone or they’ll think you’re a bad person, this will be our little secret. Something like that. So then there’s that whole overlay of secrecy and inadmissibility, and what are you supposed to do about that when you’re four? How are you supposed to understand that soemthign has just transpired that you’re not allowed to share with anyone? You don’t have a model of the world that’s sophisticated enough to account for all that. And so then perhaps from then on what you do is avoid thinking about it. Now that’s not the same thing as repression. Avoiding thinking about something is not the same as repression. Because it doesn’t require an act of repress in order to do it. And then maybe, you know, years later, you start to recall what happened. But what you recall is an unclear mess. And maybe most of it… because you might say, well how are things represented as memories when you can’t develop a sophisticated representation? And what seems to happen, and this is in a sense, the reverse of Freudian theory, is that the event is represented in the body. And so you can think about the representation of event as a multilayered neurological phenomenon. And so if you encounter something that’s unexpected or frightening, the first thing that happens is that very, very ancient reflexive systems act first. And those things are fast. And so that’s the sort of thing that, for example, might protect you against a snake bite. If a snake jumped out at you you’re going to jump backwards, and believe me, you do that before you even see the snake. Because it probably takes you a quarter of a second to produce a complex visual representation of the snake. And if you wait around for a quarter of a second, then you’re dead. And so what’s happened is that your nervous system has conserved basic reflexes that are only a few synapses long. And so maybe those work between your retina and your spinal cord. Your retina and maybe a very primordial emotional system, like the amygdala, is wired up to detect things like snakes and it just sends a message down to your spinal cord, or slightly more sophisticated motor control systems that says “jump backwards now’. And then maybe, you think about it, it isn’t even till after that that your heart rate goes up and your blood pressure goes up and you start to breathe heavily, and then there’s a wave of fear and revulsion, which is perhaps there to teach you not to do such a stupid thing again. You know, we don’t exactly know why you would experience negative emotion, you know, or what function a negative emotion has, except that we do know that a pattern of neurological behaviour that’s followed by a punishment, or a threat, is less likely to be re-implemented in the future. Okay, so the reaction to the anomalous thing is body, and then maybe it’s emotion, and then maybe it’s image, like imagination, you know, what just happened? And then maybe it’s articulated speech. But lots of things don’t get past image to articulated speech, and some things, I think, don’t even get past body. [Dr. Peterson’s phone rings] Sorry about that. So I don’t think that these traumatic memories are so much repressed, as Freud had it, as never brought forward for development. So I’ll tell you a story about how this might work, okay? So one time I had this client, and she was 27, and I only saw her once. This was when I was just training to be a psychotherapist. And she came in to see me and she said that she had been plagued by these thoughts of being sexually abused when she was a child. And I said, well, who was doing this to you? And she said, well it was my brother. And she said, he was a lot older than me. And so I formulated this mental model of her being, you know, somewhere between 10 and 13 and her brother being somewhere between 15 and 20, because the way she described it was that she was overpowered by a physically larger male. So we talked for a while. And then she finally told me… I said well how old were you when this happened? And she said well I was four. Okay, and then I said, well okay, how old was your brother? And she said well he was six. And so I said well look, you know, here’s one way of looking at it. Like you’re looking at it from the perspective of the four-year-old. It’s a regression, in some sense. That’s still how old you are as far as experiencing the memory. Here’s an alternative hypothesis. Your brother wasn’t a predator, you were both terribly supervised children. Well, you know, that made the lights go on in her mind. Because she never thought about it that way. Like she’d never taken that representation, which would be her emotional experience as a four-year-old related to a six-year-old… a six-year-old is a lot bigger and more powerful than a four-year-old, right? It’s like 50% older, so it’s a big deal when you’re four. But if the issue for the memory is its relevance to current conceptualisation and behaviour, it was much better for her to update the memory, in a sense, and think, well, yeah, like a six-year-old’s this high, and a four-year-old’s this high, and what the hell were my parents doing anyways? And that’s an entirely different story than the one that she had come in with. And you know, that seemed to be a great relief to her, and that’s partly because, you know, if you’re bothered by a traumatic memory, it keeps resurfacing on you, which it will, and it’s actually one of the ways of identifying a traumatic memory, it’s that the thing won’t leave you alone. It’ll keep coming up in dreams and when your mind is wandering, it’ll keep coming up when your mind is wandering, and maybe it’ll come up when you’re going to sleep at night, like it invades your mind. There’s a reason for that, and the reason is is that the underlying emotional systems that are associated with anxiety, so those are mostly the hippocampus and amygdala duo, in some sense, that are mediating those, they’re an alarm system. And the alarm is something that’s potentially dangerous has happened, you need to figure out what it means so you can stop that from happening in the future. Okay so you need a plan. And to get a plan you have to do a causal analysis of the relationship between your behaviour and the traumatic outcome. That would be the first thing. And then you have to come up with a way that that won’t happen again. And, of course, for my client, that happened pretty much right away, because now she was a 27-year-old woman and the probability that she was going to be subject in any serious way to a situation the same as the one she was remembering was zero. And I’ve seen this in other clients too, is when they’re… okay, I had another client, who, when she was, I think I told you about her briefly, when she was young, four years old, she jumped in a shopping cart and went down a hill, like a paved hill, in the shopping cart and spilled out at the bottom and hurt herself. And they took her to the hospital. And then, you know, she’s all primed for being threatened. So that kind of means you’re open to rewiring. And so then when she’s in the hospital they don’t let her parents come and see her for a couple of weeks. So the trauma, the pain and the anxiety and the threat and the ambulance ride and all those things, which sort of puts her in a state like this, which might be a, like a, state that’s particularly conducive to learning, because if something traumatic is happening, you should be learning about that, what the world’s like around that right now. And she developed a permanent trauma-related paranoia about institutions, which turned, by the time met her, had turned into a whole philosophy of institutional oppression. But its core was that, and you know, rightly so, its core was that combination of physiological trauma and psychological trauma. And you know, mishandling of the situation by people in authority. So you can see under those circumstances how a traumatic memory can become a core of a whole large sub-personality, and that has to be taken apart very carefully, especially if that subpersonality isn’t the kind that can be easily integrated into the world. So for example, if you’re paranoid about all institutions, you’re in real trouble, because in a modern world, you’re faced with the necessity of dealing with institutions all the time. And if you’re more distrustful and paranoid about them than you could be if you were sophisticated, all that’s going to happen is they’re going to continually mistreat you. Because I mean if a dog comes up to you and it’s looking suspiciously and it’s barking and growling, you’re not going to pet it. The way that you interact with the system depends… the reaction of a system to you is dependent, to a large degree, on how you approach the system. So anyways, the dissocaibility idea is a really good one. I mean, if you want to get to know yourself better, and this is sort of a combination of Freudian and Jungian ideas, one of the things to do is to… so imagine that you have some sort of goal in mind. The first question that you might ask yourself is, why do you have that goal? What are the influences on you that have set that goal up, because it easily could be conscious or partially conscious, or poorly explained, or implicit, any of those things. So you want to know that, why are you doing what you’re doing? And the second thing is, if you find yourself avoiding things on the way to that goal, the next question is, why are you avoiding them? And you know, that’ll mean delving into parts of yourself that are quite hidden and quite uncomfortable. So for example, if you discover that the reason you’re pursuing a particular goal is because it’s what your parents want you to do, one question that immediately arises is, yeah but is that what you want to do? And, you know, that’s a very complicated question. Because you’d have to dissociate the part of you that’s ‘the you that doesn’t want to do it’ from the part of you that’s ‘the you that does want to do it’. And then you’d have to figure out why in the world you’d be avoiding. So you know, it might be that you’re unbelievably angry that you’ve been tilted towards this particular goal for reasons that have nothing to do with your choice, and so that every time you have the opportunity to study, or accomplish something that would move you farther to that goal, you’re either not motivated, so you can’t pay attention, you can’t study, you can’t learn, and you procrastinate all the time, or you do seriously counter-productive things. So people for example, people can be… I just had someone write me here a while ago, because he was watching the YouTube lectures, and he said that he had dreams for six weeks that he drove his car off a cliff and crashed it. And then, at the end of the dream series he drove his car off the cliff and crashed it. And he asked me what that meant. And I said well, the dream is telling you that you’re being far too careless with your life. I mean, that’s what driving a car off a cliff repeatedly means. It’s like, you know, that’s a good descent, unconscious descent, into the underworld. Well, and he was being warned, the psychological reality was such that the warning was extremely serious and so was the danger. And so then you might say, well why would he drive himself off a cliff? Well, you know, that’s a suicidal gesture. And then you might ask, well why would somebody be suicidal, and that could be, well they’re out for revenge against their parents, or they’re out for revenge against the whole world, or they’re out for revenge against themselves, or they just want to make their painful consciousness go away, or they’re living a messy and pointless and painful life, and they want to punish themselves for it. You know, it’s very, very complicated and tangled down there at the bottom of things, and people don’t really like to look into it, and I suppose to some degree that’s the shadow element. Because what you find there is seldom what you want. I mean one of the prime dictums of Jungian psychotherapy, and most psychotherapies are predicated on the idea that you should find out what you’re avoiding and then you should figure out how to voluntarily face it. Now, you might add to that, you should find out what you’re doing and why, and see if that’s actually what you want to be doing. And if those reasons are reasons you like. That might, you know, in some sense sum up therapy in a couple of phrases. But in order to manage that, then you have to look at all the things you’ve been avoiding. Well, what do you avoid? Well, it isn’t rainbows and cookies, right? The things that you avoid are the things that no one wants to look at. And so, Jung’s primary dictum for his psychotherapeutic practice was a Latin phrase, which is ‘instercuilinis invinoteur’ which I’m probably pronouncing wrong, which means either ‘in filth it will be found’, or ‘where you want most is to be found where you least want to look’. And you know those… that’s a horrible philosophy. But you can see that it’s almost self-fulfilling, because of course the things you’re going to avoid are the things you don’t want to face. Obviously. Now, the shadow element of the psyche, in some sense, when you were watching the movie, for example, you saw these drives, mostly sexual and aggressive, that were manifesting themselves in all sorts of ways. And so that would be maybe the repressed or unincorporated elements of the id. But then there was another more complex side of that, where the… people were reacting to that, because they felt downtrodden and oppressed and anti-social and critical of social structure and all of that. Because they were unable to manifest themselves properly in the world. And that produced fantasies of extreme destruction, exceptional destruction. And for them they were mostly sexually related. But for other people that can manifest itself in incredibly violent fantasies about the destruction of society as such. So if you can’t invite all the parts of you out to play, the parts that get left behind are not very happy about it, and they don’t just sit around having a tea party. They turn into, especially as you mature, they turn into these warped monsters. And their mode of action in the world is anything but positive. And a Freudian world… like the world of the psychoanalytic unconscious, is quite a terrifying place, because it makes you second-guess everything. It’s like, it’s not a paranoia. It’s very, very difficult, once you’re trained psychoanalytically, to ever assume that someone’s benevolent motivations are only what they claim they are. You’re always looking for the other missing piece. And I think it’s extremely useful, you know, because you run into people, particularly ideologues, who will claim that they’re acting on the world’s behalf. It’s like, yeah, who made you a saint? And why should I believe all the good is on your side? Like, what is it that you’re not talking about? What is it that you’re not revealing? I got something from Greenpeace once, for example, that was asking for donations. And the brochure was just photographs of all the people who were on the board. I thought, why do I want to see photographs of all the people who are on the board of Greenpeace? Or, the other question is, why do they want to show them? Well, you don’t have to think very hard to figure that out. You know, it’s a status manoeuver. What you’d expect in a mail-out like that is “here’s six things that we’ve done in the last six years that have improved the planet, and here’s what we spent, in relationship to administrative costs, and here’s why it was a good idea”, not “here’s our leaders”. Now there’s something wrong there. And I mean, I picked Greenpeace because it just happened to pop in mind but it’s the case for all sorts of organisations. Alright, so Freud, by 1900, had identified a lot of different functions of the unconscious, and so, here’s four of them. One was the unconscious had a conservative function, which meant that it stored memories, often inaccessible to voluntary recall. Now we don’t really know how memories are stored in the brain, but here’s a guess. So when you have an experience, imagine that that produces a pattern of neural activity. It’s not just neural, but a pattern of activity in your brain and in your body. At least part of how you remember is to reactivate that pattern, but it’s not that simple obviously, because otherwise you’d act out all your memories precisely, and we don’t know exactly how that initial pattern of experience gets edited down to the thing you remember. But we do know that it gets edited down in some ways as a consequence of its relevance to your current goal structure. How that happens? [shrugs] It seems computationally impossible. We really don’t understand how it happens at all. We don’t understand how you can compute what’s relevant and what isn’t. It seems that the world is too complex for that to even be possible. So conservative. Dissolutive. The unconscious contains habits, once voluntary, now automatized, and dissociated elements of the personality, which may lead a parasitic existence. So I talked a little bit about traumatic memories, and how they might form the node of the development of the sub-personality, but there’s something else that’s worth understanding too. So let’s say you start practising a new minor mode of being, a new attitude, or a new personality attribute, or a new habit, let’s say. It can be a fairly small thing. When you first start practising it, you’re not very good at it. For those of you who are musicians, when you first start to play a piece, you’re very inefficient at it. And then the more you practice it, the more efficient you get. It’s very weird. I’m not a very good pianist but I learned to play one really difficult song. But the terrible thing is that I’ll learn to play it, and then at some point I’ll realise I don’t know the notes any more, and as soon as I realise I don’t know the notes, I can’t use those habit patterns anymore. And then I have to figure out the notes again, it’s very, very annoying. But anyways, when you first start practicing something, it’s effortful, it requires a lot of brain activation, that’s what the scanning studies show. But as you practice it more and more, the amount of brain that you use starts to shrink… it generally moves left because the right hemisphere is more involved in novelty processing. It generally moves left and then it moves back, and the area gets smaller and smaller and smaller, until you’ve generated up a little machine. Or it’s a little hard-wired sub-personality that takes care of that particular operation. Now that’s worth thinking about too, because what that means in some sense is that your brain is full of the things that you’ve practised. And that’s not exactly psychological, right, it’s psychophysiological. It’s part of your psyche but it’s also hard-wired into your brain. If you want to overcome one of those habits you have to build a new machine that shuts it off. You can’t just get rid of it. And then what happens if you get stressed often, that new machine will get… I don’t know exactly how it happens. The stress will reduce the functioning of the new machine and the old habit will pop back up. Some of you will have noticed this. How many of you have moved away from home? Okay so how many of you notice, when you go to your family of origin, that all sorts of personality traits that you thought you abandoned immediately come flooding back. So you know that sensation, right? You go back there and it’s like bam! There’s a groove, and you’re right in it. And you know, maybe you’re as mature as a 30-year-old when you’re at your own house but as soon as you come home, it’s like poof! You’re fourteen again. And it’s partly because of that expectancy situation set up by your parents, but it’s also partly because you just don’t understand how much of your behaviour is automatic and cued by ongoing events. It’s habitual. And so, those, you might think of those as somewhat dissociated elements of the personality as well. Creative. The unconscious serves as the matrix of new ideas. So that’s a more Jungian idea and the way that seems to work… you might think, how in the world can you come up with a new idea? It doesn’t make sense, right? Because what, are you conjuring something out of nothing? Well, and you can say well they’re combinations of old ideas, but that’s not that helpful because you can’t just take a bunch of old ideas and then shuffle them and come up with some new, spectacular ideas. It’s a lot more complicated than that. So here’s one way to think about… Freud investigated, in some sense, the surface of the creative unconscious, and he was more concerned about the… Jung called Freud’s unconscious the personal unconscious. So that might be the unconscious that you have that’s related specifically to your experiences, conscious and unconscious. Like it can be deep. Jung had a dream once, for example, (I hope I’ve got this right) that Freud and him were excavating the basement of a structure, and that Jung broke through and found another huge structure underneath that. And that’s just about exactly right. And so there’s the personal unconscious and then underneath that, in theory, there’s what Jung called the ‘collective unconscious’. And that would be, God only know what that is. But in part what it would be is whatever it is that makes you human from an evolutionary perspective. And we don’t know… like you have a specific mode of being that’s a human mode of being. I think it was E. O. Wilson, who’s a great entomologist and also the originator of sociobiology, which is like a branch of evolutionary psychology, he studied ants forever, and social behaviour of ants. And he once said if we could talk to ants we wouldn’t have anything to say to them. And what he meant by that is that, like ants are interested in a bunch of things that you don’t care about at all. Like they’re not jealous, they don’t get jealous, they don’t fall in love, they don’t have sexual feelings or behaviours. They’re not a cognitive creature. It’s like, what the hell are you going to talk to an ant about? “How’s it going, carrying that grain of sand?” An ant doesn’t even care about that. And so it’s interesting, it’s really a profound observation, because what it indicates is that you couldn’t even communicate with someone unless you were 99% the same as they are. Because to communicate with someone means you have to share a whole massive immense set of presuppositions. So for example, if I say I got jealous at a party last week. It’s like, you’re not going to say, what do you mean, jealous? That isn’t going to be your question. You’re going to say, well what were the particular circumstances that elicited that response? I don’t have to explain anger, I don’t have to explain playfulness, hunger… you know, all the basic human motivations that you see displayed say, in the typical adventure movie or romantic comedy. It’s like, those don’t need explanation, because we’re the same. And it’s that sameness that constitutes the essence of the collective unconscious. Now, Jung’s hypothesis was that you’re not only biologically structured, you know, in terms of your morphology and your physiology, but that that extends right up into your brain structure and even above that, into the contents, either the contents of your psyche, or at least into the way that your psyche becomes organised across time. And you know, it seems like a hypothesis that’s so bloody obvious that you can’t believe that people would have disputed it for so long, but experimental psychologists were very strongly influenced by behaviourists. And the behaviourists assumed, partly for ideological reasons, and partly for the sake of scientific simplicity, that human beings were blank slates, and that all we were was what we learned. Well, there’s a book out now called ‘Human Universals’, unfortunately I can’t remember the name of the author right now [Donald Brown] but it’s a book, it’s a work of sociology/anthropology, and this person has collected human commonalities, so what’s the same about people everywhere. Well, we pretty much all wear clothes, sometimes for protective purposes, but if not, generally at least for ceremonial purposes. There’s pair-bonding in societies, people fall in love. The basic emotions are the same. We use fire, that’s a big deal, you know, because no other animal can manage that. There’s literally dozens and dozens of universal commonalities across people, and that’s part of the substructure of the collective unconscious. So anyways, back to the creative idea. Well, partly your creative act is going to be a consequence of your attempts to integrate the peculiarities of your own experience with the peculiarities of your culture, and the more general phenomena and states of being that you share with other people. So because you come into the world and have your own viewpoint, you have access to information that no other person has access to. And so to some degree, that can be the basis of your creativity, just that information. But then in order to communicate it, which is also part of being creative, right, because you can’t just be… if you’re creative but no one can understand you, it’s more like you’re schizophrenic than you are creative. You have loose associations and so forth but you can’t put together a coherent story. So then you have to take that unique information and integrate it with your cultural knowledge, your cultural narratives, and ground it in universal human biology, and then you can present that as a creative act. Now, that’s one possible place for the origin of new ideas, but here’s another. So remember we talked about Piaget. And Piaget basically said that to begin to understand something you act it out. So you represent the world with your body. By sitting on a chair you represent the chair with your body. By walking through a doorway you represent the doorway through your body. By grabbing a glass you do the same thing. So you’re matching… you’re imitating the world all the time. So you’re mapping it onto your physiological structure. Okay, so that you get a sense, that would mean, that’s kind of what understanding means. You know, because that’s a complex term to sort of understand. What does it mean to understand something? It means to get a grip on it. And you know, we use those terms for a reason. You know, you’re standing firmly in relationship to it. You can handle it. All of those things. So that’s one… so that’s the beginning, but then also you’re capable of imitating, so you can imitate yourself, which is what you do when you repeat experiences that have a positive outcome, but you can also imitate other people. But then you think, okay, well who are those people imitating? Well the answer to that is, it’s like we’re LED screens, and we’re constantly rippling imitations of imitations of imitations of imitations across our physiological landscape. I mean, you guys are the sum total of a very long evolutionary process, but you’re also the sum total of an incredibly long process of mimicry. And so, what you mimic is your culture. So you could think of your culture as something with a personality. It’s a complex personality. And it’s the personality of your ancestors, a perfectly reasonable way of looking at that. And you imitate that. You know, that’s why we call our laws a ‘body of laws’. And you could say that the legal system, especially with English common law, is the articulated representation of the imitative customs and rituals of the entire society. It’s been brought right up into full articulation. But it was there to begin with. So part of where you draw your material for creativity is that you observe the behaviours and interactions of all people who’ve been imitating all people since the beginning of time. And that’s unbelievably informative. It’s way more informative than you could ever represent. You know how much information someone can indicate with just lifting your eyebrow a quarter of an inch, right? That can indicate irony, that can indicate the relationship of the joke to another set of jokes that that person knows that you like, and it’s very complicated. You can’t articulate all that. But in some sense you know it, right, you’re a player in that game. Well now and then… so then imagine, okay, you’ve got all that embodied, to the degree that you’re a sophisticated player. Then your imagination is representing you, and it’s representing the world. So that’s an abstraction, right? Because your imagination is not the world, it’s a representation of the world. And then what you can do… so that means in the imagination, there’s all sorts of information that’s about the imitated behaviour. And then, then you can talk about the image. That’s sort of what you do when you interpret a dream. So what’s your dream doing? Your imagination is watching you wander around in the world. And you have your category systems and your theories and so forth. And so then your dream puts forth what that… like an imagistic representation of what that might signify. And it’s in this weird language, which is an image-laden language. It can range from completely incoherent, just juxtaposed images, to unbelievable complex and sophisticated full-developed narratives. And that’s part of the process by which the information that’s embedded in you and the culture at a behavioural level moves up to the imagination and then pops up into articulated space. So you have a dream, the dream is about you. And then you talk about the dream, and what you’re doing. You’re trying to translate the images into articulated representations. And that’s also a good way of thinking about how memory moves from the bottom up. And what’s interesting… you know how sometimes you have a realisation or a moment of insight? And that… there’s a feeling that goes along with that, it’s like a charge. And I think it’s a charge that you get from simplifying something but also from experiencing the new possibilities that emerge as a consequence of that realisation. What seems to happen is that you have the behavioural realm, let’s say, the things you act out, and all the things you imitate, very, very, complex. And then on top of that you have the image of that, right? And you’re trying to get the image right but it’s really hard because this changes and this floats around. So you’re trying to get those lined up, and then on top of that you’re trying to get your articulated representations lined up, so that you can say about what you know about who you are. And when all those come together, you think man, I’ve got my act together. But now and then you’ll have an insight, you know, you’ll think… well, like this women who I told you about who had been molested. The insight was well, I was a little kid but so was my brother. Bang! It’s like, wow, all sorts of things that didn’t make sense anymore just fall into place. You get this articulated representation that can sum up a whole bunch of… what would you call them? Divergent and apparently unrelated image representations. And then all of a sudden your path forward is clearer. Because you know more about who you are and you know more about how you… where you’re going. And that is in large part what’s happening in psychoanalysis. It’s certainly something that happens in dream analysis, which is something that Freud also pioneered. You know, Freud believed that dreams were wish fulfillments. And, you know, he believed that the function of dreams about wish fulfillments were to protect sleep. So for example, maybe you’re really thirsty, and you go to sleep. And you dream about drinking water. Some of you who have consumed too much beer the night before might be familiar with those sorts of dreams. And so you’re dreaming that you’re searching out fountains and you’re drinking, and Freud’s interpretation of that would be, well, you should stay asleep. And so the dream is providing your underlying id-related motivational system, say the one that governs thirst, with the fulfillment of its desire. But I think that’s… I really think that’s wrong, although it’s weird because dreams of course could be doing all sorts of things. But what seems to happen instead… I realised this most particularly once I heard about a study about the effects of testosterone, cycling testosterone on female sexual activity. So the plan is this, is that in women testosterone levels vary across the monthly cycle, and so does sexual desire. And what seems to happen is that as testosterone increases, the frequency of sexual acts doesn’t necessarily increase, but the frequency of sexual fantasy increases. And so the hormone is driving the fantasies, and then the fantasies drive the behaviour, it’s something like that. And so, the dream isn’t fulfilling a wish, what it’s doing is… that’s how the motivational system manifests itself in a plan for action. It’s like well you should be going to look for sources of water, if you’re thirsty. And so, because the… you know the hypothalamus has to communicate with you somehow. It doesn’t just grip your behaviour and move you around like a robot. You know, it has to indicate what the state, what your state is, it does that all sorts of ways, and then start tilting you towards solutions, using your memories and your skills and everything that would be related to successful outcomes of that form in the past. The other thing I should say about creativity, and this is I think something very useful for understanding people’s reactions to psychoanalysis. I have a lot of creative people in my clientele, for a variety of reasons, and some who aren’t creative. And creativity is a trait. And most people aren’t creative. It’s not common. And some people who are creative are so creative it’s just absolutely beyond comprehension. So Picasso for example, created 65,000 works of art, three a day for 65 years. Now that guy was creative. So anyways, lots of people aren’t creative, and they’re not interested in psychoanalytic ideas, they’re not interested in archetypal ideas, they’re not really gripped by narrative. So if you happen to be… one marker for creativity by the way, for openness, is really liking fiction. And women actually like fiction more than men, because women are actually slightly higher in part of openness than men are. So what else… if you like poetry, you know, and it gives you an aesthetic experience, if you really get deeply involved in music, if you’re able to produce things that are creative. If you have the kind of mind that works in associations. So for example, if I told you guys alright, write down as many words as you can in the next three minutes that begin with the letter L. Those of you who are more creative would come up with more words. So there’s a verbal fluency component. I could say, okay, how many uses can you think of for a brick? And then I would score that. The first would be how many uses you came up with, that would be the sheer number, I’d throw away the stupid ones that make no sense, and often you have to get a panel of people to make that judgment, right. You know, you could say “well, you could use it as a thing”. It’s like no, X, you don’t get a score for that. So then, you get another score for how uncommon your response was. And that’s an originality dimension. And actually if you calculate those two dimensions, fluency and originality, from a divergent thinking task, which is the one I just told you about, you can predict how creative people are quite well. Anyways, the really creative people seem to have a deep well-spring of unconscious ideas that are always flowing forth, and some of those people dream like mad. And they have extremely sophisticated and complex dreams, and those dreams seem to guide their behaviour. And that’s quite entertaining when you see that in psychotherapy if you have an interest in such things. And you might say well, how do you know if your dream interpretation is true? And the answer to that is, well how do you know if how you interpreted the last book you read is true? And the answer to that is, you don’t, and even if you did, you don’t know how you know it. Because lots of people can read a book and they come away with slightly different interpretations of it. And that’s because, you can imagine that the book is a multi-level pattern. And then the reader is a multi-level pattern. And then if you put those two together, you get a multi-level pattern that’s made out of the reader and the book, and that’s going to be unique for every single reader. Except that we have commonalities of structure so that we can communicate about it. So you read a book and it strikes you, certain things strike you and certain things seem right. If you do a dream interpretation, it’s a collaboration between you and the client about the interpretation. So usually what I do is I have people, first of all they’ll tell me their dream, from beginning to end. Now Freud would say, already you’re introducing all sorts of bias, because they’re not telling you the dream, they’re telling you the dream as they interpret and remember it. It’s like yeah, that’s a problem. But you do what you can, you know? And I tell people just write it down as fast you can and try not to think about it too much, because we don’t want post-dream editing. And so then I’ll listen to it, and then they’ll tell it to me again, slowly. And then I’ll listen to a sentence and then I’ll let my associational network work on it, and then see what that reminds me of, and then I’ll ask the person what it reminds them of. And then we’ll talk about… those are the direct associations, those are the things Freud would call ‘free associations’. And you could say, well, around every utterance, like a sentence, there’s a collection of potential meanings, right? And those meanings might be direct meanings, like really tightly associated with it, to sort of loose meanings. And so you can hit back and forth with client and therapist, until you think, oh yeah, okay, that seems to be where that’s going. And you’re also thinking about it in relationship to the person’s current life experiences and the rest of the dream and maybe all the dreams they told you about before. So it’s insanely complicated. But it’s what people do when they listen to a conversation. You know, how do you know you’re interpretation of a conversation is true? Well, you know, there’s a variety of ways that you can approximate that, but you don’t know. And there’s lots of different ways of interpreting a conversation. That’s why the post-modernists ended up in their little hole with regards to literature. They realised that there’s no limit to the number of ways you can interpret a book. But then they took the next step which was that therefore it has no meaning. It’s like no no no, wrong, wrong. It’s very unsophisticated thinking. It just means that the way the book portrays meaning is exceedingly complex, and you can’t describe it using normal, linear rationality. It doesn’t mean the meaning isn’t there. That’s so pathetic. That’s such a pathetic theory. It’s dangerous too because it means that nothing has any meaning and that’s the most dangerous theory, that. So anyways, you talk to the person about the dream and the dream image and about what that triggers off in their memory, and you also watch what they say, because sometimes… so for example, someone (this just happened recently) might be describing a dream where they, where they’re wandering around somewhere, and they’ll say “and I’m taking the wrong road”. You think oh, okay! Well now we know what your dream meant because you just said it. I’m taking the wrong road. And that’s a Freudian slip, and it’s so interesting, because if you listen to people tell their dreams, you have to kind of listen… it’s like they have two minds talking at the same time. And one is describing the dream, but the other one is describing their life, and they don’t even notice the connection, and you point it out and they go oh yeah! Right, right I didn’t know I said that. And that’s a Freudian slip. And I think what’s happening, in part, is the right hemisphere, which is an image accumulation and aggregation system, it’s kind of a low-resolution pattern collection system, uses mostly images. And tries to put them together in meaningful ways, but the meaning is vague and comprehensive. And then the left hemisphere, roughly speaking, which is the linguistic hemisphere, is trying to state what that says in words. And it’s very difficult to make that transformation, but that’s why dream analysis works in part. It’s because you’re facilitating the movement of the information in the images into the articulated part of the personality. You’re moving information up the abstraction hierarchy to the point where it can be well utilised. Now, I’ll end this with… I’ll end this discussion of Freud with a description of some research that was done recently by… relatively recently, let’s say the last 20 years, by this psychologist at the University of Texas at Austin, whose name is James Pennebaker. And Pennebaker is a particularly smart psychologist. And he had this idea… Freud had another idea that was related to therapy, and he thought that what happened, if you came into therapy and you talked about a traumatic event, was that you were cured by catharsis, which meant that the trauma had a bunch of emotion associated with it, and that was repressed but it was down there kind of struggling to get out, and causing you all sorts of stress and misery trying to hold it down. And then if you could just tell someone about it, and express your feelings, then that would help you. Expressing your feelings does not help you, by the way. That turns out to be wrong, but it turns out to be wrong in an interesting and useful way. Because it’s sort of… it’s almost right. So what Pennebaker did was he took undergraduates and he had them come in to the lab for three consequential days, and he had them write for fifteen minutes each day about the worst thing that they had ever done or the worst thing that had ever happened to them. Often people are traumatised by something they did, not something that happened to them. In fact, more often, because someone watches themselves do something absolutely horrific, and then they think, ‘oh my God! I did that! Who am I?” They don’t know, and then that’s… you know, things start coming unglued. So anyways, Pennebaker had them do that, and then for the next two weeks they felt pretty wretched about it. And so, that’s interesting, because if they would have only measured the result of the intervention in the two week time-span, everyone would have said never write down your traumatic experiences because it’ll make you worse. But over the next six months, what happened in particular was that their physical health improved. They went to the doctor less, they reported less illness, and so forth. And it’s because their overall level of stress decreased, for complex reasons that we could talk about later. But then Pennebaker, being an excellent scientist, he thought okay, well catharsis works, you’re expressing your trauma and poof! You’re fixed. But he went back and he thought, well wait a second. Maybe how you express it matters. So he went back and he counted all the words that were associated with emotion, and all the words that were associated with understanding and cognition. And what he found was two things: one was the more words that you use, particularly as your narrative developed, that indicated comprehension and understanding, the better you did over time. And so what happens is, it’s not the expressing of your emotion, it’s the expressing of your emotion and then the weaving of the memory into a new coherent representation from which you derive a moral. So what’s the moral of a trauma? Don’t let it happen again. That’s the moral. And the threat systems are going to be throwing that thing up at you constantly until you figure it out. How did I get into this, how do I avoid it in the future? That doesn’t mean it’s your fault, but your anxiety systems, they don’t care about that. They care about how you’re not going to fall into the same hole. And the only way to do that is to analyse the causal pathways that led to the hole to begin with, and see if you can either reconfigure your behaviour and your attitude, so that doesn’t happen again, or maybe you just don’t go those places anymore. Either way. And your… the trauma threat systems, as soon as you come up with a comprehensive representation that you believe in, they’ll leave you alone. And this can happen very, very rapidly. Like with nightmares, I’ve cured people’s nightmares in one session, no problem. I ask them to bring the nightmare up into their imagination. Maybe someone’s chasing them. Okay, think about them chasing you. You’ve got to visualise it, really visualise it. The more real you make it, the better. Okay, they’re being chased. How are you feeling? “I’m all anxious and afraid”. Okay, turn around and look at the thing that’s chasing you. So they do that. Then maybe they say what it is or whatever, but maybe they don’t even do that. And then I say okay, before you go to bed at night, just when you’re almost falling to sleep, you’re in a hypnogogic state, where images are starting to come, you run that. So they run that, poof! That nightmare’s gone. And the reason for it is that they’ve now reconfigured themselves as the thing, not the thing that’s being chased, that’s a prey animal, they’ve configured themselves as the thing that can turn around and face the thing that’s chasing them. And that’s the same motif as the dragon hunt in the Jungian archetypes, right? Face what you’re afraid of and that will cure you. And that’s really one of the fundamental motifs of Freudian psychoanalysis. So, you know you have an exam on Thursday. I’ll post representative questions of the exam when I get home after this lecture, probably this evening. The test is here, it’s multiple choice, you’ll have no problem finishing it, it’s not that long. And if you’ve done the readings and come to the lectures, you’ll probably do fine. It’s not a tricky test.
Alright. Welcome back. So, the next four lectures are also oriented towards discussion of primarily clinical theories of psychology and psychopathology. We’re going to talk about lines of thinking that, in some ways, run parallel to those of the psychoanalysts because the thinkers we’re going to discuss now, with a few small exceptions—well, all of them—all of the thinkers we’re going to discuss in the next four lectures were either influenced heavily by Freud, Jung, and Adler or were themselves thinkers who influenced Freud and Jung. So, there’s an intellectual continuity stretching over—with people who are deeply educated and who very thoughtful there’s intellectually continuity of ideas stretching over exceptional spans of time. And so that sort of relationship is exactly what you would imagine. Rogers had a variety of influences—so let’s say Freud and Jung and Adler—but he was also very much influenced by phenomenological ideas. And the phenomenologists were, and are—phenomenology is a brand of philosophy, which I’ll explain more deeply, and the other primary domain of influence on Rogers was Christianity likely and then Christianity also via probably Northern European culture as far as I can tell. The reason I’m talking specifically about Christianity in relationship to Rogers is because as a young man he was a fundamentalist Christian and he was a seminarian. So he was quite oriented towards mainline Protestant Christianity, but when he was in university he had a crisis of belief I suppose. He was even going to go to China as a missionary at one point. But he had a crisis of belief in university because he had also been scientifically trained. His father was a farmer who used rather advanced farming techniques, and so Rogers was trained to think scientifically from a very young age. And he experienced the conflict between his religious belief and his scientific presuppositions quite intensely, and in that battle his formal Christian belief was the loser. However, his thinking is very much influenced by fundamentalist Protestant presuppositions and the effect of those I’ll describe as we walk through Rogers’ thinking. Now, it’s important to understand the philosophical underpinnings of a global personality or psychology theory because every theory is set within a set of assumptions—things that you have to assume to be true in order to proceed with a theory. They’re like the axioms in classical geometry. You can’t prove the axioms; you have to accept them. Once you accept the axioms then you can move forward and use the whole system. I think the reason that systems have to have axioms, which are elements of belief, is because every system is incomplete, right? It doesn’t cover the entire world. And so, in some sense, you need a place to dispense with your ignorance and the way you do that is by making assumptions. We’re going to act as if the following is true. And then you can proceed with a partial theory and you’ll have some success with it. But it’s useful to understand the presuppositions because it orients you properly towards the theory. Now Rogers is a phenomenologist, and phenomenology is a brand of philosophy, which I believe started with Edmund Husserl but was probably made most influential by his student Martin Heidegger. Now Heidegger was a philosopher I suppose somewhat like Nietzsche in that his thinking ran very much counter to what you might describe as general academic philosophy. For example, Heidegger believed that ever since the time of Plato, which is when people think philosophy began more or less, Western philosophy had taken an erroneous direction: it had become too concerned with the nature of structures of thought and not concerned enough about the nature of being. And so you can determine those two things. Being is how things are and thought, of course, is how you represent things. And one of Heidegger’s missions was to reestablish being as the central reality of philosophy. Now that begs a question, which is: “What is being?” Well, to conceptualize reality as being is not to conceptualize it the same way that you conceptualize it in terms of modern Western thought, because one of the presuppositions at the basis of modern Western thought is that the most intelligent way to divide up the world is in terms of subjective and objective experience or subjective experience and objective world. So the fundamental scientific presupposition, you might say, is that there is an objective world; it’s the real thing. You come to that by performing certain procedures, documenting them, describing the outcome of those procedures, documenting them, and then allowing other people to do the same thing operating under the presupposition that if they experience the same outcome from the procedures, then what they’re experiencing is real. That’s basically the scientific method, right? Method. Results. You detail the method, which is how you act on the world; you get the results. You compare them, maybe across multiple observations that you do; and then other people do multiple observations; you come up with a consensus, but it’s a method bound consensus. And then of course you abstract out general principles from that and it works very powerfully, right? Make no mistake about it. The idea that there is an objective external world and that that’s the best way to conceptualize reality is an unbelievably powerful tool. Now, whether or not it’s an accurate description of reality: that’s a much more difficult question. And it’s partly a matter of definition, actually. You know, it’s the case there are different forms of geometry; you might know this. You can start from the presupposition that reality has a three-dimensional structure—and then you’re basically within the realm of Euclidean geometry—but you can also start with the presupposition that reality has a four-dimensional structure. And that kind of geometry was invented in the late 1800’s and it turned out to be the perfect geometry to describe the universe that Einstein conceptualized when he came up with his great theories in the second decade, thereabouts, of the twentieth century. So it’s interesting because can start from different assumptions, build tools on the basis of those assumptions, and sometimes you find out that those tools work very well indeed. Now, it’s not that easy to think of flaws in the subjective experience/ objective world conceptualization, and that’s partly—for us as modern people it forms the basis of so much of what we think that we just think about it as axiomatic. It’s just true. It doesn’t bear any question. But I’m going to offer you a couple examples of why it might bear some questioning and you can think about it. The first problem is is that the classical scientific view of the world has a very difficult time accounting for certain things. So, for example—these are called “qualia” often by people who are interested in consciousness—knowing the wavelength of light doesn’t seem to tell you very much about the subjective experience of color. You know, we experience color, for example, in a non-continuous fashion, right, because we see discrete colors like you’d see in a rainbow. I mean they shade into each other to some degree but it’s not like they go from light red to dark red in a continuum. There are clear demarcations of color. Well, that’s because of the way your brain is wired. You know, it seems like, over the course of evolution, what we’ve learned is that parsing up that wavelength fragment in terms of categories, which would be the different colors that we see, has substantial practical utility. Now one of the things you might ask is, “Well, do those colors exist?” Well, objectively they don’t seem to exist as colors, partly because the wavelengths that we see are actually continuous. So when one color shades into another, there’s no radical transformation in wavelength. It’s a continuum but we see it categorically. Okay, so is that real or not. Are the colors we see real or not? Well, that’s a good question. You can’t get a collective experience of pain. You can get a collective experience of the blackboard, but pain seems to be something that’s limited to subjective perception. But it’s very difficult—no one acts as if pain isn’t real. I mean I would say that of all the things that you might consider real we act as if pain is the most real thing. You certainly can’t argue out of it for example. It seems like a fundamental element of experience. Okay, so that’s two places. We also have no account in the subjective/ objective breakup bifurcation of the world—we have no explanation whatsoever for consciousness. And that seems like a big problem, right, because you can make a case that there is no being without consciousness. Like, “Is there something if there’s no one there to perceive it?” By the way, that is not the same question as, “If a tree falls in the forest and there’s no one there to hear it, does it make a sound?” It’s not the same question. It sounds superficially the same, but this is a much more complex question because we don’t know, for example, if—we don’t know the relationship between time and consciousness. We have a certain perception of time. We have a certain temporal realm in which we exist. Our refresh rate for our vision, for example, is about sixty hertz, which is why you can see computer screens flicker if they have a refresh rate slower than that. So sixty hertz to us looks continuous but, you know, there are a lot of microseconds in a second and for a computer—especially a fast-processing computer that can do maybe a trillion operations a second—if it was watching, so to speak, a movie it would just see a still picture that was there forever and a another still picture that was there forever. And it wouldn’t have the impression of continuous movement. So there’s this weird subjective element to time that’s very difficult to understand. And then here’s a more complex criticism of the subject/ object idea. I thought about this for a long time. So, the best example I know of it is: I read this book a while back written by a KGB officer and it was published after the fall of the, you know, wall in the Soviet Empire. And this KGB officer claimed that he had worked in a biological warfare unit in the Soviet Union, and the purpose of the biological warfare unit was to turn infectious diseases into aerosols so that they could be sprayed on enemy populations. And so they were working on two things: developing a very virulent infections—and a virulent infection is one that’s severe but also very transmissible, because those things are separate—and also one that could survive being aerosolized because it turns out that that’s quite difficult, which we should be all be very thankful about. And one of the products they were working on was an attempt to cross Ebola with smallpox. Now Ebola is—you all know about Ebola I presume—it’s very very fatal, although they’ve learned ways to treat it now and maybe have a vaccine. But at that time it was very very fatal. And smallpox is incredibly contagious, and so they were hoping they could develop something that was very very contagious and very very deadly that you could spray on civilian populations. Now, you know, here’s where it gets tricky, and it gets tricky here because how you answer this question inevitably depends on how you define truth. And truth is actually something you have to define before you can have a conversation about it, which is a kind of a strange thing. Anyways, you can make a case that determining how to cross Ebola with smallpox and aerosolize it is a perfectly valid scientific question, and because science is value free it’s very difficult to make an argument that that’s any worse experiment than any other kind of experiment or any other kind of investigation. And you can also imagine even that if didn’t go to the aerosolization stage that positive things might come out of it. Maybe you’d end up with a more detailed understanding of DNA or something as a consequence of the investigation that would have positive consequences. But it still seems that—the idea of doing scientific research to cross Ebola with smallpox—there seems to be something wrong with that, and it’s maybe that sense of wrongness as well that can’t be captured within scientific models. And so one of the things that Jung claimed—and Rogers and the phenomenologists—is that, in some sense, is that the scientific reality has to be encapsulated within an ethical reality rather than the other way around. Now Rogers would say, “You know that feeling that you have when you hear about someone crossing Ebola with smallpox; that feeling you have in your body. That’s a real thing, that feeling, and that’s part of being.” Now, for the phenomenologists, being is actually—it’s complicated to define and it’s hard to understand. But what the phenomenologists do is start with a different set of assumptions. They don’t assume that the best way to approach reality is to break it up into the subjective and the objective. They presume instead that the way to approach reality is by assuming that all your experience is real. All of it. Now that doesn’t mean there aren’t different categories of experience, you know, because you could still say that a dream and the experience you have walking—dreaming of walking down the street and walking down the street are still different things, and the phenomenologists would say, “Yes, you can keep your categorical distinctions intact, but you have to say that they’re both real.” Now, this is an assumption and I told you why the assumption is generated. Part of the reason the assumption is generated—the alternative assumption—is because there are problems that emerge with the set of assumptions that make up the scientific worldview. Now it’s not that surprising that the scientific worldview can’t encompass the subjective because the scientific worldview was actually established—by Bacon and Decartes say and by other thinkers of that time—it was set up to exclude the subjective from the conceptualization of objective reality. So you can’t really criticize science because it does that, but you can say the fact that the subjective is excluded is a fault, or at least an incompleteness, and that incompleteness sometimes has extraordinarily serious consequences that you can’t just dismiss. Because you might say, “Well, had the Russians—the Soviets—been successful in crossing Ebola with smallpox and aerosolizing it then we might all be dead,” and then you might think that any theory that leads everyone to be dead might reasonably be criticized for its assumption to universal truth. Now, you can debate that and rightly so, but all I’m pointing out is there are reasons to go at this from another approach. Now, it was Rogers’ basic assumption that you were more likely to be properly oriented in life if you adopted a phenomenological approach to your experience and to break up reality in that manner. So let me give you an example. When my daughter was about three, she had a nightmare and she came running into her parents’ bedroom. And she told me her dream and she was all upset by it. She might’ve even been younger than three at that point. And she had dreamed that there was a clear stream and that it was quite beautiful and that there was garbage littering the bottom of it. Now by that time, you know, she—kids are quite sophisticated in their ability to categorize, you know. By that time she’d already learned the difference between kid things and adult things, and you think, that’s a bloody complex form of discrimination, you know, because what objective features do adult things share in common that differentiates them from kid things? You can’t actually come up with a set of objective criteria that allows that distinction to be made, but kids, by the time they’re three, have got a pretty clear grasp of that. So they can come up with very sophisticated classifications. About the same time, one of my friends had a two-year-old who went outside their house one day, looked down the street, and there were a couple of garbage cans knocked over. And the kid said, “Uh oh.” And, you know, that’s also extremely sophisticated because you think, you know, a whole street is a very complex set of visual stimuli and to be able to glance at that and then to note that something is out of place and then to make an utterance of it to draw people’s attention to it is a ridiculously sophisticated cognitive act. And my daughter was doing the same thing within the context of her dream. So she was upset about this. Now, it’s quite interested, eh, because you think, “Well, why would someone who was three be upset about the fact that a stream—a beautiful, clear stream—had garbage in it?” You know, it’s a really—it’s like innate environmentalism or something like that. Innate concern for the environment and that could easily be the case, you know. I mean if we fouled our environment up continually during our evolutionary history that was likely to have very negative consequences. Even birds clean their own nests and so do bees and, you know, they keep their hives clean and all that. So it could be a very primordial instinct. Anyways, she came in with this dream and she was quite upset. And then you think there are a couple of things you could do about that. You could say, “It’s just a dream. Don’t worry about it. Go back to sleep,” but, you know, that’s a philosophical statement, right, and it’s a misleading one, or you could argue that it was a misleading one, because what does “It’s just a dream mean?” Well, it means that it’s certainly not something to take seriously like you would take something that occurred during the day seriously. It’s a mere fantasy but with the definition of fantasy being some fundamentally useless act of play, I suppose, that you can ignore with no consequences, and not only that that you should ignore it. And, you know, that’s not necessarily true because then you’re making the case, or you might be making the case, that you don’t have to pay attention to products of your imagination. That seems like a pretty dopey thing to tell a child given A, that anything creative that you ever produce is going to come out of your imagination and B, the way that you set goals and plans for your future is by imagining them—dreaming about them, right? Everyone knows what it means to pursue a dream. And, you know, you might say, “Well, if you’re depressed it means all you dreams have disappeared.” It’s like, so maybe you shouldn’t be telling your child that it’s just a dream and so you can ignore it and go back to sleep, you know. You don’t know exactly what you’re doing when you do that. You’re certainly not paying attention to the child’s experience because she did have that image and it did make her upset, and those are facts. And as far as people like Rogers would be concerned, those are facts about reality, or they’re elements of reality, and they should be dealt with as such. So, I told her to close her eyes and to bring the dream image up in her imagination, which she could do very well, and then to imagine that she had some rubber boots on and that she could go into the stream and pick out the garbage and put it in a garbage bag and that there was a garbage can nearby and that she could put it in the garbage can. And so we went through that and that calmed her down and then she went back to bed. And then you might say, “Well, what am I doing doing that?” Because you might say, “Well, that’s just a fantasy, just like the dream, and because they’re just fantasies neither of them have anything to do with reality.” But, you know, that again is not a very sophisticated way of thinking because the dream presented my daughter with a problem, or you could even say a class of problems. And the class of problems includes all of those things that people do, and other animals, of course—all the ways that the environment can be defiled. Well, that actually is an existential problem. And then you might say, “Well, what should you do about it?” and the answer to that might be, “Well, maybe you should do something about it insofar as you can do something about it,” because then you’re conceptualizing yourself as an active agent and not just a passive victim or a passive recipient of the problem. You could actually do something about it, and that’s a way different message than “It’s just a dream; you can ignore it and go back to sleep.” You know, maybe you shouldn’t actually tell your child to be ignoring reality and go back to sleep. Maybe you should be telling them to wake up, and see reality as clearly as they possibly can, and not ignore any of it including their fantasies and their dreams. And that doesn’t mean that their fantasies have the same reality as the reality that you experience with everyone else, but that fact that it’s not the same reality that you experience with everyone else doesn’t mean it’s not reality. Now Rogers would claim, for example, that to ignore a private experience warps you fundamentally. So, here are the basic outlines of his view of the world. So there’s first of all: You exist within phenomenological field. Now, phenomenon comes from the Greek word “phainein” and phainein means to shine forth. And so phenomena are those things that shine forth for you. Now, the way to understand that is to imagine that you’re reading a book and maybe a passage of it really strikes you as meaningful. Well, then you might say, “Well, why?” There are lots of passages in the book. If someone else was reading the book it’s not obvious that the same passage would strike them. And then you might say, “Well, is that a consequence of the structure of you as an interpreter of the book or is it a consequence of the contents of the book?” and the answer to that is you actually can’t tell, because the book is neither the thing that’s printed nor the reader. The book is the interaction between the reader and the book, and that interaction is actually unique for each person even though there are some commonalities across people—because otherwise you wouldn’t even be able to talk about a book. Well, regardless, when you’re interacting with someone some things announce themselves on your field of consciousness and some things don’t and so the phenomenologists would say, “Well, some things shine forth for you while other things don’t.” It’s a little bit like one of Jung’s ideas about the development of the self. Jung believed that if you followed things that if you followed things that announced themselves to you as meaningful, that they would take you through a descent to begin with—where you would encounter things you were afraid of or terrified of and disgusted by and wanted to avoid—and then the consequence of that would be that you would incorporate a lot of new material into your personality. And the consequence of that would be you’d be reborn, roughly speaking, as a stronger person, and then if you just kept doing that all the time for the rest of your life in small or large ways that you’d become more and more and more fully differentiated and developed. And he would have said that the ultimate potential target of that kind of development was what he described as the self. The self is a multi-faceted conceptualization, so that’s not all there is to it, but the self, from the Jungian perspective is who you could be if you could be who you most deeply are; if you didn’t shy away from anything; if you accurately encountered and then integrated, even in the Piagetian sense, your experience. Now that’s exactly the same idea that Rogers had. He believed that there’s a phenomenal field and it’s full of experience. All of your experience manifests itself as the phenomenal field. It’s quite interesting because that means also that other people are part of your phenomenal field—part of your experience. And then within that field there’s a circumscribed area that he described as the self. Now that’s different than the Jungian self. So it’s a little terminologically confusing. Rogers’ self is more like Freud’s ego, but Rogers would define the self as though aspects of the phenomenological field that you call “I.” “I felt like…” I’ve had clients who tended to talk in the third person about their emotions, or they would say, “The body.” They wouldn’t say I. Maybe they’re describing cutting themselves and they would say, “Well, the body needed to be cut.” And what Rogers would say about that was that the person existed in the phenomenological field and part of that phenomenological field was demarcated by the self but the self hadn’t expanded to incorporate as much of that phenomenological field as it should’ve. Another concept that he had was the concept of the organism. Now, you could think of the self as what you identify as “I,” and then you can think of the organism as all those things that are unique to you that you might identify as the “I.” Now it’s tricky, eh, because imagine that you get angry during a fight with someone—argument—and they say, “You’re angry,” and you say, “No, I’m not.” It’s like, what exactly are you doing there? The other person—we’re going to assume the other person’s right for the sake of this argument—they can clearly see that you’re angry but you’re not allowing the organismic manifestation of that motivational state or that emotion to be incorporated with those things that you identify with. Rogers would call that incongruence, and he believed that incongruence was roughly equivalent to psychopathology so that part of your goal was for the organism to respond appropriately to the broader phenomenological field—now we can talk about what appropriately means, but we won’t do that yet—and then what the self was supposed to do was accurately symbolically represent organismic responses to the broader phenomenological field. So, now you can see that there are similarities to that concept as say Freud’s idea of the ego and the Id. You know, because the Id was this sort of external thing, which was home of motivational and emotional forces that couldn’t be easily integrated into the ego and partly because the superego said, for example, that they were wrong. So there are these sets of phenomena, you know, that all of the different clinicians are talking about, but all of them are talking about it starting from different initial presuppositions. It’s like a group of people in a room shining a flashlight on a very complex object. You know, they’re all standing in a slightly different position. The complex object is the same thing but you can only see parts of it so you need multiple different ways of looking at things so you can come up with a cohesive and coherent account of something that’s actually beyond your understanding because, of course, not only can you not accurately symbolically represent the phenomenological—the entire domain of your being—you can’t accurately represent even the aspect of that field that’s related to the organismic you. There’s part of you on top that you identify with “I,” roughly speaking, and it’s trying to model a model of something very complex and, of course, that’s extraordinarily difficult. Now, why is it doing that? That’s the central mystery of consciousness, you know. There’s this problem that consciousness researchers always refer to. It’s annoyingly termed I think. It’s called the “Zombie Problem,” and the Zombie problem is: Why is consciousness necessary? Why is it necessary for something complex like a human being to actually have awareness and self-awareness? Why couldn’t it just wander through the world reacting in pre-determined, deterministic fashion zombie-like. No awareness—robot-like, let’s say. What’s consciousness for? Rogers doesn’t really discuss that and so we won’t at the moment although I think there are some reasonable ideas. Consciousness, for example, allows you to generalize between certain phenomena. Anyways, regardless, there are the self, the organism, and the broader phenomenological field. Let’s say you go into a pub—bar—and you’ve been there many times and so you know the people in there, you know where to sit, you know what’s going to happen, you’ve met friends there. You might say that your organism exists, at least in part, as a very accurate model of that broader phenomenological world. And then, inside that, you’re aware of your knowledge of the bar, and so if your organism is properly adapted to the broader phenomenological field, when you go into the bar or other familiar place, things that you expect and want happen instead of things that neither expect or want. And you could say, “Well, perhaps that’s a reasonable definition of adaptation.” Now, this isn’t biological or evolutionary adaptation; this is personal adaptation. They’re similar in some ways but importantly different. I mean you could be adapted to an environment without that in any way having any effect whatsoever on your evolutionary adaptiveness. Now, if maybe you’re not very well organismically-adapted to the environment—you have a model of it—and because of that when you go somewhere familiar, people don’t like you as much as you think they do and you’re not nearly as much of a master of that situation as you think you are. And one of the consequences of that—so that would mean that your self-representation is too rigid and simplistic and full of defenses to notice the discrepancy between your organism and the broader environment, and that’s pathological. And the way that that’s going to be marked is, first, by anxiety. You know, maybe you tell a joke—there are some people sitting around you—you tell a joke and you see people kind of, you know, making that face, and maybe rolling their eyes. It’s like, well that’s not exactly—you might think, “Well, they’re joking. You know, they’re just teasing me.” Well, maybe they’re not; maybe they’re damn sick of your stupid stories, and you’ve told them fifty times, and you’re not very funny, and they’d rather you weren’t in the bar at all. And it may be that you’ll actually notice that, but you don’t necessarily notice it in a fully symbolically-developed way. Now, what that would mean is maybe you start feeling anxiety, and Rogers identifies different levels of feeling. It might start with the subception, and to subcede something, which is a word that I guess comes from general semantics, is to have the event affect the way that you’re interacting with the world in ways that you don’t necessarily notice. So it’s sort of equivalent to the idea of subliminal when you talk about advertising. A message is flashed at you and it subtly changes the way that you interact with the world but you don’t notice that. And that happens to people all the time. I mean it’s actually a part of our normal cognitive structure. I mean when you walk into this room, the room tells you all sorts of things about how to behave, and you don’t notice that the room is telling you those things because you know what it’s telling you so well that you just act it out. You don’t need to go through all the complex processes of actually perceiving and thinking about it. And so Rogers’ point is that you can detect things organismically that will affect the nature of your experience without necessarily either even perceiving that or definitely not symbolically representing it. Now, maybe the social discomfort that’s inherent in the situation rises up to the level of perception. That’s not symbolization yet. Then you might think, “Well, what does it feel like to be anxious?” Well, and I’m not asking, “What are the objective markers of being anxious?” because we actually don’t know those. We can kind of infer them. Sometimes people’s heart rate goes up, but sometimes it decelerates, and then there are facial expressions that are associated with anxiety but you have to use those to infer. If you get anxious, I don’t feel your anxiety; I have to infer it. But if you get anxious, you feel your anxiety. And so then the question might be, “Well, what does it mean to feel anxious?” Well, that’s a hard question, and the reason it’s a hard question is because you never have to answer it because if you tell someone, “I feel anxious,” then they refer to their own feelings of anxiety and then they know what you mean. And you never have to come up with an explanation of what it feels like. The idea that the feeling is an element of experience is something that we just take for granted, you know. “I got angry today.” Everybody nods. Or maybe I tell a little story and I say, “Well, you know, I got on a bus and I was missing like two cents, and I asked the bus driver if he would let me get on the bus and he didn’t. And that really annoyed me because I take that bus everyday and the driver knows me. And I got angry,” and everybody’ll nod. And the reason they nod is, well partly because they can imagine that that’s how they would’ve reacted in that situation, but even more importantly, they accept the reality of angry as a response and they know what it feels like. So, but explaining it: that’s a much more difficult thing. So the point is is that you can have experiences that you know of—first of all you can have experiences that you don’t know of. That would be the subceived experiences. Then you can have experiences that you perceive but that you haven’t symbolically represented, and those might be emotional or motivational experiences. And then you can have experiences that you have symbolically represented in a way that captures their gist accurately in a way that’s reflective or your adaptation, or lack thereof, of the broader phenomenological world. And Rogers would say that latter state is preferable. You know how to act or you know that you didn’t act properly and you know how to fix it, which is almost as good, and you represent that accurately. Now, you might imagine that you could concentrate on the mismatch between organismic responses and the environment. That’s what behavior therapist really do. They say, “Well, how are you acting and what are the consequences?” But that isn’t really where Rogers goes. Rogers is more psychoanalytic than the behavior therapists, and what he seems to be primarily concerned about is whether or not your self-representation is an accurate representation of how your organism is responding. In some sense, for Rogers, the organism takes the place of God. It’s more or less omniscient. So your organism is going to tell you the truth in every situation and it’s up to you whether or not your going to pay attention to that and make sense of it or whether you’re going to engage in any of the different kinds of shenanigans that you might engage in to stop yourself from going through the complex process of symbolization. Because you might say—well, you’re back in the bar—and you might say, well, you noticed the anxiety and then, you know, different ways of symbolizing it come to mind. “These people are all just jerks,” and then another thing that comes to mind is, “Well, maybe nobody likes me.” And then maybe another idea that’s associated with symbolization comes to mind that is, “Well, maybe there are elements of my social behavior that I should adjust,” and I presume that if Rogers was having a conversation with one of his clients he would assume that that was the most fruitful potential step towards accurate symbolization. Now, Rogers felt that anxiety emerged when the self-concept was not accurately symbolically representing the organism’s experiences, and so that would be, in some sense: If you’re a house divided within yourself then you’re pathological from a Rogerian perspective. And you can think about that, in some sense, as a move away from necessary simplicity. I mean if your self-concept is set up properly it doesn’t contain contradictory and misleading bits of information; everything works seamlessly together. And so what that would mean is that you think about something, you act it out, and it works. And then that’s an indication that the organization between, say, these three different levels of being is—well the right word is isomorphic. Each represents the other with sufficient accuracy. And so that means that you’re congruent, and if you’re congruent then the world is treating you not only in the manner that you want to be treated but also in the manner that’s most likely to further your action in the world as an organism. And so that’s partly why Rogers believed that the organism had wisdom: it’s because its natural proclivity was to operate in the world effectively and to expand its competence at the same time. Now, a self-actualized person—because that’s one of Rogers’ phrases—is someone whose self-concept accurately represents their organismic being. Now, Rogers was primarily a clinician as well and his theories were derived from his clinical experience. And his theories informed his clinical practice. And Rogers invented, or developed, what he believed to be a new kind of therapy and he called that “client-centered therapy.” Now you’ve probably heard about student-centered education. I mean Rogers’ ideas have had a tremendous amount of influence, certainly not least in educational psychology—also in conflict reduction of various sorts. If you start with Rogers’ initial assumptions, which are, first of all, that you should regard your experience as real; second, that your organism will give you accurate information about the totality of experience; and third, that your self-concept should accurately encompass your actual experience, there are implications of that theory for therapy. And one of the implications is that you can figure out what you should do if you want to because your organism will tell you, or at least hint at you, about which directions are correct and which directions aren’t, and if you follow those then you’re going to naturally gravitate towards a state of being where you’re more and more accurately represented by yourself but also that your representation and your organism are going to act more effectively in the world. They’re not bumping up against each other all the time. And, you know, they’re not in conflict anymore, and so that’s the goal of the self-actualized person. And therapy, in part, is the art of furthering that process of self-actualization. Now, Rogers was opposed to diagnosis because he felt that it didn’t sufficiently represent the vital minutia of the client’s individual experience, and I think that his claim was extremely important, you know, because medicine—psychiatry—tends to classify everything. And you might say, “Well, are the psychiatric diagnostic classifications real?” and then the answer to that is: It depends on what you mean by real. And you might think, “Well, that’s an annoying answer,” but it is still the answer. And so I could say if I was being cynical—although I don’t really think it’s a cynical response—if I willing to sound cynical, that the only reason that psychiatrists diagnose their clients is so that insurance companies pay the bills. And I actually believe that that’s more true than the claim that the psychiatric diagnostic categories actually capture the essence of the person’s problems. In my clinical experience, classification has had almost zero utility, and the reason for that is because it’s too low resolution. It doesn’t capture the individual properly because the thing about a client—a clinical client—is that it’s precisely their individuality that’s the fundamental issue. It’s like, they have to make their way through the world in their body, in their time, in their position in culture, with their advantages and disadvantages, and that requires a solution that’s unique in many ways and one that’s also personal. And Rogers also wasn’t a particularly great fan of the psychoanalysts’ tendency to look for the causes of present behavior in past events. So he didn’t regard fishing in the past as a necessarily useful expedition, or as a necessary expedition, although if issues of the past came up in therapy he was perfectly willing to deal with them. He didn’t accept the Freudian theory that the fundamental cause of psychopathology was, say, traumatic past experience. Now, this gives Rogerian therapy a particular flavor. You could also call it “Non-directive therapy.” Now, if you’re a behavior therapist, you might actively strategize with your client about what they’re going to do in the next week and once they establish their goals you might offer some hints about what strategies they could use to monitor themselves and to attain those goals, and maybe you’ll even have them keep track of it. Rogers, generally speaking, wouldn’t do something that directive. In fact, he strove not to unduly influence the client’s decisions about important future events, and in that way he was quite similar to Freud, because Freud would sit so the client would be laying on a couch and Freud so that the client—his patient actually—couldn’t see him. And then he would listen to the person free-associate, which in some sense means that they would ramble on, and he was attempting by doing that to facilitate the self-realization of their own memories. If things happened to you in the past and they still cause you emotion—let’s say they’re more than eighteen months old for the sake of argument—Freud would assume that if you kind of wandered around that memory somewhat haphazardly and in an associational way—the way conversations naturally unfold—that you would bring things to light and that would allow certain kinds of emotional expression, and that, in fact, in itself would be curative. But Freud didn’t want to interfere with that process or guide it to any great degree, and Rogers was like that; he wanted you to make your own decisions. And so he believed that the therapeutic endeavor could not occur unless certain conditions were met, and the conditions were: Willingness to tell the truth. So when a client comes to see me, one of the first things I tell them is: “You can tell me anything you want—although you’re perfectly within your rights to maintain your privacy—you can tell me anything you want but tell me the truth as clearly as you can because if you don’t I don’t know what’s going on with you and there’s not any possibility at all that this process will be useful if we’re talking about things that don’t exist. So one condition is the person is willing to come and see you; so that means they want to transform. The second precondition is that they’re going to communicate with you, and communication means they’re going to do their best to tell the truth but the therapist takes the same vow, in a sense. And so one of the things that I tell my clients is that I will never let them do anything that makes me resent them. So if I’m asked to step out of my way for some reason to take an additional session or maybe to meet them somewhere and I do it, they can be assured that there won’t be a price that will be extracted from them later for interfering with the smooth flow of my day. So, and the other thing that I do—and I’ve learned this from Rogers and from the other people that I’ve read—is that I’ll listen to people talk and then sometimes something will occur to me. And I don’t think about it as I thought something because I’m actually somewhat a follower of Nietzsche’s dictum, which is that the fact that you think is no proof that—the fact that you experience thoughts is no proof that you thought them. They just appeared. Well, you don’t think that you think up your dreams, right? You have your dreams. There you are in bed; there are the dreams. Are you having them? Well, it doesn’t seem like it. It seems like you’re experiencing them, in some sense, the same way that you experience the external word. You’re not voluntarily creating them. Well, why do you think anything different about your thoughts? And that’s a very useful thing to realize, by the way, because otherwise you think you’re your thoughts and then if you have negative thoughts, well then you assume that they’re true and they’re not true just because you think them. They’re just thoughts, and maybe they’re true and maybe they’re useful and maybe they’re not. So stepping back from them a little bit is incredibly—it’s like Buddhist detachment in a sense. It’s an incredibly useful thing to do. I mean that’s another thing that’s really characteristic of modern people, especially if they’re smart. They think they think, first of all, and second, they think that the things they think are true, and neither of those things are necessarily true. And abandoning your belief in them makes you much less rigid and much more able to expand your preconceptions or even radically change them when the circumstances demand them. So the person has to be wanting to change, in principle in a positive direction; they have to be willing to tell the truth. Then the next element of Rogerian psychotherapy is something that he called “unconditional positive regard,” and unconditional positive regard, in the Rogerian tradition, is something like radical acceptance. It’s actually a hallmark of modern child rearing techniques. You should wholeheartedly accept all aspects of the person’s being. Now, Rogers believed that, or posited that, partly because he also believed in—what was it called—conditions of worth. Here’s a condition of worth: “I don’t like you when you act like that.” So imagine you tell a child that—“I don’t like you when you act like that”—and maybe you tell them that about a bunch of things that they do. But maybe those are integral parts of the child’s being and by making your lack of acceptance known you make it impossible for the child to incorporate those aspects of his organismal experience into his self-concept. You can see echoes of the superego/ego idea there. And so Rogers would say, “Well, if someone comes into psychotherapy and experiences unconditional positive regard, that means that they’ll be able to reveal those elements of their organismic experience that had been rejected, say, by the social world and themselves; experience them; and then potentially incorporate them within the self concept and that that’s going to be a good thing, because Rogers is a great believer in the natural inevitability of positive transformation if you set that up as your goal. He also believes that that should be your goal and that it’s actually your natural goal if, for example, you haven’t been subjected to arbitrary conditions of worth. Now, I’m going to read you something that Rogers wrote, which is quite interesting, and I think I found it extremely effective. Oh yes, that’s another thing I should mention. There is one other important assumption in the idea of self-actualization. The other thing that Rogers tried to ensure that his clients developed is autonomy and independence. Now, for Rogers, there was very little difference between the move towards autonomy and personal independence and the process of self-actualization. Now, given that we’re looking back at Rogers’ work fifty years later, you might ask yourself if autonomy and independence is a necessary precondition for psychological health, because you could make the case that productive interdependence and more communal orientation is equally healthy—but that’s not a Rogerian presupposition. So his ideal is the fully-functioning individual. So here’s his hypothesis with regards to psychotherapy: “Assuming a minimal mutual willingness to be in contact and to receive communications, we may say that the greater the communicated congruence of experience, awareness and behavior on the part of one individual, the more the ensuing relationship will involve a tendency toward reciprocal communication with the same qualities, mutually accurate understanding of the communications, improved psychological adjustment and functioning in both parties, and mutual satisfaction in the relationship.” Okay, so let’s unpack that. “Assuming a minimal mutual willingness to be in contact and to receive communications.” Well, the first thing you might say is that’s pretty much the hallmark of a relationship, right, because if you’re not in contact, well clearly you don’t have a relationship, and if you are in contact but you’re not communicating you probably don’t have a relationship either. So and, you know, that also begs the question of exactly what a relationship is for, and that’s something that’s very much worth considering because people don’t really usually know what a relationship is for. They certainly know that as a general rule they’re going to pursue them but they don’t really have any idea, in some sense, what the optimal state is or what the desired final state should be. Now of course the desired final state fifty years ago was marriage, but it’s certainly the case now that most people who are couples aren’t married. Now, you might ask yourself, “Well, what’s the utility of a relationship and what’s the utility of a long-term relationship?” Well, a Rogerian answer to that would be: The more based on trust the relationship is, the more likely that you’re going to be in contact and receive communications, and then, as a consequence of that, you’re going to become better and better at representing your organismal experience within your self-concept and that’s going to facilitate your moment towards self-awareness and self-actualization. It’s a two brains are better than one idea. So we say, “Well, we established a relationship, okay, and the goal of our relationship is to make things better.” And the way we make things better is by telling the truth as you see it. So, remember, this is a phenomenological theory and so the truth that Rogers is talking about isn’t object truth, and I suspect that that’s at least in part because establishing objective truth within the confines of a relationship is—I think it’s technically impossible. And we talked about that before, because each interaction between the members of a couple, or people in any relationship is contaminated, in a sense, by all of the other interactions they’ve ever had plus everything they bring to bear on the situation, and there’s just no untangling that objectively. You know, “What did you mean when you said that?” Well, God, you know, you can argue about that until the point of divorce and ten years afterwards, you know, without ever coming to a satisfactory conclusion. Alright, “The greater the communicated congruence of experience, awareness, and behavior on the part of one individual, the more the ensuing relationship will involve a tendency toward reciprocal communication with the same qualities.” Okay, so here’s the idea: You go see a psychotherapist—a Rogerian psychotherapist. At least in principle, this is someone who’s mastered, or is attempting to master these basic modes of being. So what they’re going to do is they’ll tell you, “I’m going to tell you the truth as I see it,” and so they way I see that happening in psychotherapy is that when someone comes to see me I listen to them, and that means that I’m not distracted by anything else. I’m not thinking about anything else. I’m not thinking about what I’m going to say next. I’m not thinking about the things I have to do today. I’m not thinking about the last time I saw this person. I’m not allowing my attention to wander away from the person, and then I’m watching them and listening to them at the same time—and those are the same things because to really listen to someone you also have to watch them. Because then you subceive perhaps, or perceive, all the non-verbal elements of communication that go along—well, partly with voice tone but partly with eye direction and partly with very subtle transformations of facial gestures. So sometimes, for example, I see on my clients that they’ll all of a sudden turn into a child. It’s very interesting. It’s like they’ll be recounting some experience—it’s like fixation from a Freudian perspective. They’ll be describing some experience from the distant past and for a second their expression will approximate who they were when they were six-years-old. It’s really something remarkable to see, and you can see these things if you really pay attention. And then as they talk I’m watching what’s happening inside me as I listen to their words, and all sorts of things will happen. Sometimes I’ll get an image or sometimes I’ll get a memory of something we talked about before. Or sometimes I’ll notice that what they’re saying right now is different than something they said five minutes ago and so then I’ll say, “Well, wait a second, you know. I’m trying to understand what you’re telling me and I noticed that you just said this, and it seems to imply this, but then, you know, a couple of minutes ago, when we were talking about that, then you said this and I don’t see how those two things are the same.” And I’m not doing that because I want them to rectify the paradox; I’m doing that being I want to understand what they are saying. And if someone says A to you and then they say B, you don’t know what they’re saying. And so the question is for clarification. There’s no other direction than that. And then maybe, you know, I’ll have a little image, like maybe the fragment of a dream, and I’ll say, “Wait a second. When you said what you just said this is what I experienced.” And then maybe we’ll talk for a while about what that might mean and I can say to them what—so, for example, sometimes people will come to my office and they’ll do all sorts of strange things. Like I had one client who had psychosomatic epilepsy, and one of the first times I saw her she had a seizure in my office. And I was watching her and it didn’t really matter to me that she was having a seizure. And I thought, “That’s pretty weird,” because normally when someone’s having a seizure it’s like you get affected by it, right? I mean there are sensations that emerge in your midsection, and there are thoughts of emergency, you know, because your body, in some sense, is mimicking their body—which is what your body does all the time when you’re talking to people—and that produces a sense of urgency. And I sort of just watched her have this seizure and I thought, “Oh, it’s not real; it’s not a real seizure.” But she was very good at it and, you know, as far as she was concerned she couldn’t tell if the seizures were real or not. And sometimes if you have psychogenic epilepsy you’ve had an epileptic seizure at one point that was genuine. Well, it’s exceptionally complicated and it’s not easy to develop psychogenic epilepsy, but she had developed it and part of the reason was that she thought that—she was toying with the idea that existence as a psychiatric patient would require less effort and responsibility. And so she got tangled up at one point with one of the mental hospitals and they diagnosed her with paranoid schizophrenia, which is not something I would recommend—especially if you don’t actually have it—because once you’ve got the diagnosis, well are you really going to know? What’s going to happen, eh? You do something like that—you have a psychogenic epileptic seizure and a variety of other symptoms—they’re the consequences of a very complex complex in Jungian terms. There’s a secondary motivation in Freudian terms. You go through with the whole routine then you end up in a psych hospital, and you see four experts and they tell you you have paranoid schizophrenia. Do you really think you’re going to not believe that? Or at least ten percent of you is going to believe it. You’re going to wonder after that. And if another twenty people tell you that and you’re put on medication, which you could easily be, then a year later, well, you might still not have paranoid schizophrenia but you are not going to be doing very well. So, well that’s a good example of what happens when your self-concept and organismic valuing systems aren’t working carefully in tandem. Anyways, so someone might be telling me a story that’s, you know, about something terrible that happened to them and I’ll just be sitting there like a brick wall. It’s like, “You’re not affecting me.” And sometimes I’ll tell people that. It’s like: “I don’t know why, you know, that’s a pretty terrible story but I’m having no emotional response to it at all. Do you have any idea why that might be?” Well then, you know, often people aren’t very happy when you tell them that, and that’s fine. They can be unhappy with that. That’s perfectly okay, but the thing is now they know that there’s at least one person that they’ve communicated with that’s actually telling them the truth who is actually not affected by their story. Because, look, if someone sits down beside you and they tell you a terrible story, the probability that you’re going to tell them that that had no effect on you is basically zero because it’s really rude not to be negatively affected by someone who’s telling you a very sad story. But if you’re negatively affected by it and it’s not true then you’re not doing them any good at all; all you’re doing is providing them with evidence to maintain what could easily become a delusion if they worked on it long enough. By contrast, sometimes people will come into my office and they’ll tell me something that just seems trivial and it’ll make me tear up, which mean I can actually feel emotions. It’ll make me tear up and it’s just some thing that they barely allude to, you know. Like a client a while back told me that—we had had a session, a family session, where I had suggested to some of the members of this person’s family that things might go better for them and their child, who was one of my clients, if for the next two weeks what they practiced doing was watching each other’s behaviour during the day and finding one thing that they could make a positive comment about. Now, and this isn’t a game. Like if you play it as a game then it isn’t going to work. If you’re going to do this properly, what you do is you watch and then you notice when a person does something that actually makes you feel positively towards them, and then you tell them, “You did this.” It has to be specific. It can’t be at the end of the day: “Well, you were pretty good today.” It’s like: “No, that’s not going to work, man.” You have to notice something they actually did. It’s usually something trivial like: “I really appreciate the fact that you took your dirty dinner plate off the table and rinsed it off and put it in the dishwasher.” It’s like, you think that’s so damn trivial it’s hardly worth commenting on. It’s like, no no no, it’s not at all; it’s exactly the specific thing that you comment on if it did in fact make you happy. You know, and you can think about that in behavioural terms. You could say if you something to do something that you like you should tell them when they do things that you like so that they what you like. But, of course, that means that you’re putting yourself on the line too, right, because if the person knows what you like then they can withhold it from you so you’re not going to do that unless you trust them. You’re really not. So, you know, you might be in a relationship—you might be in a marriage—where never once during the whole bloody marriage do you ever tell the other person what actually makes you happy. It’s like, that’s stupid by the way. So, like if you want have a really miserable time of it that’s an excellent way to start. You could also add to that the presumption that if they really loved you they’d know what you liked, which is also— Your partner’s no smarter than you, generally speaking, and you don’t have a clue what’s going to make them happy so I don’t know why you’d expect them to—especially if they’re male—why you’d expect them to return the favour. So then you teach them, you know. Like it’ll probably take four years. It’s like: “I like it when you do this,” and then, of course, they won’t so you might have to mention it again in a month. You might think, “Well, it’s going to take eighteen months to train this person, at least.” I mean they’re smart; they’re smarter than a dog but not much smarter. So you have to use repetition and you have to be judicious about. And if you do that, and the other person is also doing that to you, and you both know that you’re doing that, and you’re both trying to make things better, then you’re going to communicate about it and then with any luck things will get better. But that means you actually have to want things to get better, and that’s part of the problem, of course, because not everybody wants things to get better and there’s a part of everyone that would be just as happy if they didn’t get better. So anyways, Rogers’ idea is that if you communicate properly with the person that you’re in the relationship with that you can model proper being, in some sense, and that at least you can attempt to model. And then as you attempt it you’ll get better and better at it and as you get better at it the other person will get better at it. And that works too. So I had a client who was a very anxious person so when the person first came to see me they couldn’t even talk on the phone, and now they’re acting publicly—they’re acting in public. And that’s been the consequence of about seven years of, I would say, Rogerian conversations where almost all that I did was listen. Now, I don’t quite get the unconditional positive regard thing, although I know why Rogers said it, and his idea that arbitrary conditions of worth can make someone pathological are true. But I think a more nuanced sense of unconditional positive regard is what happens as you watch the person and they tell you something, and as they’re telling it to you you can see a little part of them sort of come alive. And that often happens when their face loses a fair bit of its rigidity and you can see more of what they were like when they were a child sort of peeping through. So their face sort of opens up. You can think, “Aha! That was really good for that person. Whatever they’ve been telling me that they’ve been doing, that was right on the right track,” and then you could say, “Look, I noticed when you talked about this, you know, your face relaxed, you didn’t look as anxious, you were smiling—and it was genuine smile—for like a second or two there it looked like you were doing well and you were happy.” It’s like: “Let’s do a bunch more of that,” because you know if you see in somebody that they’re capable of experiencing that, then you could help them experience that more, and that’s the purpose of a long term relationship. It’s that you have your weaknesses and inadequacies and you can’t think yourself out of them by yourself, partly because they color the way that you think, and so you need somebody else to bang yourself up against—to contend with—so that all the knots in your soul can get ironed out. And hypothetically you’re doing the same thing for the other person and then both of you are on an upwards spiral, and, in some sense, that’s the core theory of Rogerian psychotherapy. It’s like: Genuine, honest communication can heal people, and genuine dishonest communication can make them pathological. And in some sense I think Rogers got closer to the truth—if you inferred Rogers’ presupposition, that’s as close to the truth as any psychotherapist has got. Deceit makes people pathological, and that’s true. A lot of—and Jung noticed this as well—a lot of what you’re doing in psychotherapy and in any genuine relationship is a moral endeavour. You’re trying to make things better, and if the other person is deceiving themselves, or lying, or failing to become aware of things that they should become aware of, they’re going to get bent and twisted out of shape and then they’re not going to be congruent with their body or the broader world. And then they’re going to suffer, and then that will cascade then all sorts of things will start to happen. And, you know, that’s the path to perdition and an involuntary trip to the underworld. When we meet again I think I’ll show you a little clip of Rogerian psychotherapy because a woman in the 1950’s agreed to be filmed, which had a dramatic effect on her life by the way. But it provides a nice real world illustration of what Rogers is doing when he’s trying to listen to people.
Okay, so we’re actually going to take a step back historically. We talked about Carl Rogers last time as a phenomenologist. So we started our brief foray into the ideas behind phenomenology, but now we’re going to go back in time a bit and we’re going to talk about the end of the 19th century, and we’re gonna discuss Nietzsche, and Dostoevsky, and Kierkegaard in some detail, and the reason we’re going to do that is because those three men - I would say more than anyone else in the 19th century - laid the groundwork not only for what would become psychoanalysis and then later personality psychology and clinical psychology, but they also described the broader social, political, and cultural situation that modern people find themselves in now, and their thought is exceedingly sophisticated and it’s really worth grasping because if you can get - you know we’re going through these personality theories one at a time, and we’re making forays into biology and neuropsychology, you need a structure underneath that. You need to understand a structure underneath all that to slot in everything into because that way you can understand it in more detail, and so, partly because ideas develop historically, you know, so an idea’s a seed and out of the seed, other plants grow and so forth, and the plant grows and so farth and branches off. If you can get back down to the origin point, then you can often understand the entire structure more straightforwardly, and also these three men, they're so brilliant that it’s a joy to encounter their thinking even though it’s very, very subversive - seriously subversive. So, we’re gonna start with this diagram which you’ll remember. Okay so think about this from the Piagetian perspective, like we made the point that as the child points itself, let’s say, together, it starts by practicing micro routines - micro motor routines - and those are accompanied by perceptual frameworks and also they're incorporated into a motivational value system because they’re motivated actions, and then the child practices sequencing those micro personalities, we’ll say, together to make ever more and more complex and ever more and more integrated macro personalities. So that’s basically what this diagram describes. We were looking at it from an adult perspective so, you know, if you're going to be a good person, you can decompose being a good person into sub parts of being a good person, and - so being a good person is an abstract ideal, but as you move closer and closer to the point where goodness is manifested in action, you move closer and closer to actual movements in the world. So the abstract category, good person, is actually made out of you can think about it as a very complex melody of motor actions and perceptions, and perception is very tightly linked to motor action because whenever you perceive anything, you're doing it in part by actively investigating the world. It’s partly why your eyes are moving around all the time, and if you're listening you move your head, and you know, to touch something you have to actively investigate it so it’s always an activity of exploration. Now, in some ways when you think about the child piecing its being together from the bottom up, you can think about that as a biological process unfolding, you know, and you can think of the child as crawling and then learning to walk as a biological process unfolding, but that’s an oversimplification because human beings exist from day one in a very, very social world. And so what that means is the way that those behaviors or micro personalities start to organize themselves is always under the influence of the society in which they're embedded, and so you know, Piaget talked about the child as being - as having reflex, basic built in reflexes at birth, and that those reflexes are then elaborated up into more and more complex structures, but you can think that even the elaboration of those basic reflexes, even right from the beginning, like there's a rooting and sucking reflex which you can elicit from a child by tapping on the side of its cheek when it’s very newly born, and it’ll start to try to put what's tapping in its mouth, and that's part of the reflexive process, the built in perceptual motor unit that allows the child to begin to suckle. Now the thing is though, what it’s suckling isn't a static and objective entity. It’s a person, and part of breast feeding is the establishment of a relationship, a complex relationship because it’s also not only a feeding relationship. It’s a caring relationship. It’s a relationship that's based on tactile interaction. There could be nervousness associated with it, and often is especially for a new mother. It’s a very complex dynamic social act, and so what that means is that right from the beginning, in order for the baby to engage in that process properly, it has to allow its initial reflexive movements to be modified by social necessity immediately. So for example, if a baby is breastfeeding, it can't bite, and you know it doesn't have any teeth so being bitten isn't necessarily a catastrophe, but it’s not pleasant. So what will happen if the baby bites the mother is that the mother will pull away and startle the baby, and the baby will cry and you know, the mother will be at least startled by the error. So the baby has to learn to - it has to learn to be civilized in some sense right off the bat. Now you know, when Freud was talking about the process of socialization, he tended to concentrate more on toilet training, you know, because he thought of that as the first place where the - the first major place where the id of the child, which Rogers would regard as an organismic, as the organismic experiential domain is brought under control of the superego, right, because the baby, obviously its fundamental, biological function is to relieve itself, but that has to come under very very strict social control, and it’s a complex form of learning, you know. It’s basically the acquisition of all voluntary control over what was here before an involuntary reflex essentially, and so that can go well or it can go badly and it can go very badly. So I knew a family who had a daughter at one point, and that daughter would only defecate in her diaper when she was three. So that meant she had full, voluntary control over her bowel function but there was no way she was going to participate in the social ritual that surrounded proper toileting. There was a war going on, like a serious war, and that sort of thing happens well not infrequently, and of course you remember in the Crumb movie, the mother - the boy is accusing the mother of giving them enemas and her, of course, denying that any such thing happened which was something that made both of them roll their eyes, and you know, they all laugh but it’s really not particularly amusing. So, anyways my point is is that even at the micro level, the manifestation of what we’ll call micro personalities expands and organizes into an environment that’s conditioned by social expectation. Okay, so then - then, and this is something we haven't talked about before. One thing you might ask is okay where does the social expectation come from? Now, that's a very complex question because in some sense, that's the same question as where does culture come from, and that's partly a complex question because you have to take into account evolutionary history which provides the substrata for the development of culture, so that would be human biology. You'd have to take that into account, and then you have to take human history into account, and what you don't have to take into account is not clear, right, because it’s very difficult to track the origins of the social routines that make up the fundamental social contract, you know. We know how to behave properly, roughly speaking. We have a set of expectations, and a set of wants about the way that other people are going to behave with regards to us, and they return the favor, and everyone is participating in this, and everybody basically knows it nless they're very poorly socialized and you can usually tell that right away. You know, kids can tell that because if a three year old is playing with another three year old, and one of them is poorly socialized and so maybe has the behavioral repertoire of a fairly badly behaved two year old, the other three year old, being socially sophisticated will, say, will not play with the first one. So, even though they might be perfectly happy to play for a time with an actual two year old. So, it doesn't take very long. It’s really at about the age of three that children are already sophisticated enough to have embodied the rules that constitute appropriate cultural behavior, and those rules - or they're patterns exactly for the, they're not exactly rules for the child because the child couldn't explicitly state them, but they can act them out. Now you remember, now Piaget talked about this a fair bit right, because he said that part of the way that the slightly larger micro personalities, say of a two year old, are integrated into the broader social world is through games that are played with peers and with older children, and the games are ways that - like a game is fundamentally a negotiated...it’s a negotiated sphere of action and perception that has a particular goal and the goal is defined by the players, and the sphere of interaction is defined by the players and so then if you're a good player, what happens is that you become part of a higher order structure and the higher order structure is the game. So if you're playing soccer, all of a sudden if you're civilized, what you do is you manifest all those behaviors that are appropriate for playing soccer, and you subordinate - voluntarily - subordinate your individuality at that point to the higher order structure of the game that's a communal agreement, so it’s a basic social contract. So you practice being part of basic social contract by playing games, and you can do that with games that are in some sense relatively straightforward and regulated by strict conventions and articulated rules, so that’d be like a soccer game, or you can do it in a more complex way and a less structured and less articulated manner by engaging in dramatic play. So what children usually do when they're doing is that they'll gather around a little group and they'll lay out the drama so the drama would be “We’re going to simulate x. We’re going to simulate a family.” And then everybody is assigned a role, and so you're supposed to act out your role, but exactly how you're supposed to act it out is left open during the game, so you can riff and improvise, and basically what children are doing when they're doing that is acting out the family because, you know, they need to get the family in their bones because being a parent isn't a set of ideas about parenting, it’s a set of behaviors. It’s a dance that you learn to have with your children and with your partner, and it’s very complicated, and the rules go far beyond what you could ever articulate, you know, cause you can ask yourself a question like, “Well how should you discipline a child?” Well first of all, you can argue about that forever, but second of all, you cannot actually elaborate a set of principles that will guide your behavior in every situation where a child is likely to disrupt the social circumstance. So you have to be smarter than you can say in order to be good at doing something as complicated as discipling a child, you know, because discipline also means encouraging, right, because part of discipline is well you shouldn't do those things, but another part of it is you should definitely do more of those things, and so it’s the inculcation of a moral code, and a lot of that is done through nonverbal behavior and through providing a role model through spontaneous imitation, and all sorts of things that aren't verbal. Okay now, so Piaget talked about the game, and then you could think that games become more and more complex and more and more abstract and more and more like real life as you mature until they maybe the games transform into what sociologists would refer to as roles. So the role you're playing at the moment, at least in principle, is student, and you know, it’s a game and it’s a game because it’s a fiction in some sense. It’s a dramatic fiction in some sense. The only reason that it exists as a role is because society is structured in such a way that enables this to - enables you to do what you're doing and to live at the same time. So it’s not exactly adaptation to the natural world, in any sense of the word, but it’s also real life or maybe it’s almost as close to real life as you’d ever get because almost everything that modern people do, and maybe this is true for a long time into the past, is game-like in its structure. So the games just get more and more and more - they're more and more and more encompassing in some sense, but you can almost say that it never comes to the point where what you're doing is no longer playing a game. Now that's a bit of an oversimplification because there are games and metagames, but we won't talk about the metagames at the moment. Okay so now, you can understand some of the lower order games, and you can even understand some of the higher order roles like you could basically articulate in some sense what it means to be a student. But if you go up the hierarchy because you know, good person - a subset of good person could be good student. You can kind of articulate what it means to be a good student, although you can't fully articulate it, but if you go at levels above that like be a good citizen or be a good person, it gets more and more difficult to fully articulate because of course, it’s more and more abstract, and it encompasses more and more territory, and so by the time you're at the top of the hierarchy so to speak, “be a good person.” Well, it’s a much more phenomena than you can articulate. It can't be fully articulated. Now, I want to read you something that Nietzsche said. Now you have to listen to this carefully because there's some very interesting things about the way Nietzsche writes. He writes aphoristically, and an aphorism is a short statement, often only a sentence but more typically a paragraph, that's very, very densely packed with ideas, and I think you can say in some sense if you read Nietzsche - and the stuff that I’m going to read from right now is from “Beyond Good and Evil” - is that every single sentence has an idea in it, and it’s often an original idea, and that's a remarkable accomplishment. I mean, I’ve often gone through books and marked - I usually fold the top of the page over - and marked where I think there's an idea worth keeping. It’s an idea I haven't run into before so it’s an original idea. And I would say in the typical book I read, there's none of them. There might be one or two, but with Nietzsche there’s probably twenty on a page, and so it makes it - he’s packed a tremendous amount of information into a very, very small space and he tried to do that and there's a bunch of reasons. One was, his health wasn't very good, although he was an early age genius. He was a full professor in Germany at - I think when he was 22 or 23 which is impossible because you don't become a full professor, especially a hundred and thirty years ago, a hundred forty years ago in a German university at the age of 23, it just isn't impossible. But he was a spectacular genius, but his health failed him so he had a very difficult time writing, and so what he did was spend an awful lot of time thinking and a very short period of time writing, and so what that meant was that he would take a tremendous amount of thought - genius level thought - and then compress it into like a single sentence, or a single paragraph, and he said that he liked to philosophize with a hammer, and in some sense - you know that hierarchy that I just showed you, you know we talked about the idea that if you hit something disruptive in your life that the magnitude of your response is proportionate to the elevation of the level right. It’s much more damaging to be accused of being a bad person, you know seriously, than it is for someone to complain about, you know, on which side of the plate you happen to put the fork on. And I think you could say that you can sort of think of those nested hierarchies of value as nested hierarchies of - they're almost like maps in a sense. They're little units of ways that you know how to maneuver in the world, and what that means is that as you go up the hierarchy, the map is larger and larger and more comprehensive, and so if you blow up someone’s map of which fork to put on the table, that's not so bad. They can just rectify that in no time flat. It leaves 99.99% of their personality intact. But if you fail a crucial exam for example and part of the reason that you're a student is you want to go to medical school, that’ll blow out like fifty or sixty percent of your personality, or at least it’ll feel that way, and that's because what's happening is that the structure that you use to regulate the relationship between you and the world has become damaged at a high level, and that invalidates - like if you're not a student. If you're not a good student anymore, then all of the subfactors that make up being a good student might be invalid, and you know you might have put a lot of effort into being a good student, and so if all of a sudden you're not that, you have to ask yourself, well what exactly am I and where are all the errors? Well that's an extraordinarily difficult cognitive problem because you've built that structure, who knows over what period of time. It might be fifteen years or something like that, and you've been practicing building that structure, and it’s a huge part of your identity because someone might say well what are you even? And you say a student. You know, they might say what do you do, but they can easily say what are you? I’m a student. Well if you're not a student, at least insofar as you define student, then just exactly what are you? Alright so Nietzsche, you know, when he packed a lot of information into a sentence or a paragraph, you have to be very careful reading him. Jung is like this too because he’ll throw some information at you that's packed into a paragraph and it’ll be the kind of information that disrupts high level structures. You won't even notice it, and that's because it’s so subversive, and he wanted to do it. It was an aim of his. He had his reasons to do it. He would say that you have to be broken down to nothing before you can be rebuilt. So it’s like a trip to the underworld thing. So, and I suppose that’s what philosophy is. You don't learn a new principle without allowing old principles to disappear because you can't have the new principle and the old principle at the same time. So almost always any radical learning involves the destruction of old habits and actions and perception, and that's a kind of death, like it’s an abstract death, you know, but that doesn't make it not painful, and the thing is if the abstract death is of sufficient intensity, it can drive people to suicide because they regard killing themselves as easier than making the reparation, you know, facing the anxiety and the suffering and going through the intolerably difficult task of retooling. They may well regard that as more emotionally threatening than death, and so - and that's not that rare. I mean, suicide is rare, but it’s not that rare. So, you know and it’s certainly a behavior that everyone is - I suspect - is everyone here has known someone who was touched by suicide in some way, you know. It might not be your family member or even your extended family member, but the probability that you know someone who knows someone who has committed suicide is extremely, extremely likely. So Nietzsche is a very dangerous, dangerous thinker. The only person I know who kind of approaches him in that regard is Jung, and Jung is actually less troublesome because a lot of what Dostoevsky offers is destruction. It’s intelligent, brilliant destruction, but he doesn't really offer a solution. He sort of sketches out the possibility of a solution, and he died young, and then in many ways what happened was that Jung picked up where Nietzsche left off and tried to solve the problems that Nietzsche left unsolved. So it was Nietzsche for example - in some sense along with Dostoevsky who really definitively announced the death of God at the end of the 19th century, and that left people in some ways bereft of belief, and we’re going to talk about why that was so important in a moment. What Jung was doing was trying to - well he was trying to rescue the father from the underworld in a sense. He was trying - he tried to go back to the religious traditions that Nietzsche had described as fatally anachronistic and demolished by the claims of science. He had attempted to go back to those religious traditions and reassess them from a psychological perspective to pull back the necessary meaning that was embedded in them so that people could reunite with their culture and in principle not be so prone to pathological belief systems like ideology that tend to rush in when there's a gap. And you know, Nietzsche said very clearly, and Dostoevsky knew this as well by the end of the 19th century, is that the death of God would mean that people would turn en masse to rationalistic ideologies and that would be murderous. They knew that was coming, and that’s an amazing prediction. It really is an amazing prediction. It just shows you how thoroughly they understood the structure. Okay, so I’m going to read you something by Nietzsche and we’re going to return to the hierarchy so you can kind of understand something deeper about the way the hierarchy is structured. Okay, now he's talking about philosophical ideas here, and he’s actually talking about articulated ethics. So, one way that you might think about philosophy is that philosophers originate articulated moral principles, and that is often the way that people think about especially moral philosophies. It’s like it’s the philosophers who come up with the ideas, but that isn't what Nietzsche believed. Here's what he said instead. “Separate philosophical ideas are not anything optional or autonomously evolving. They grow up in connection and relationship with each other however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to a system as the collective members of the fauna of a continent.” Okay so, it’s a very interesting idea. So the first idea that he’s putting forward is that you could -- the best way to think about a philosophical system, say a philosophical system of ethics, is as if its different statements are animals related to one another in an ecosystem. So he has a biological metaphor, in some sense, for the emergence of the philosophical system. It’s quite an interesting way of thinking, of course, and it makes sense because if a philosophical system of ethics - which is a philosophical system that tells you how and why you should behave a certain way - is about how you should act and you're a biological being, then of course it only makes sense that the concepts themselves which are guides to actions can logically be considered biological entities. They're abstracted biological entities but they still have the same nature as biological entities, and that means, according to Nietzsche, that they're subject to the same rules. Now this is the sort of place where he foreshadows Freud deeply. So Nietzsche says, “They nevertheless belong just as much to a system as the collective members of the fauna of a continent. This is betrayed in the end by the circumstance; however, unfailingly the most diverse philosophers always fill in, again, a definite fundamental scheme of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always resolve once more in the same orbit however independent of each other they may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills. Something within them leads them. Something impels them in definite order, the one after the other, to wit the innate methodology and relationship of their ideas. Their thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a re-recognizing, a remembering, a return, and a homecoming to a far off ancient common household of the soul out of which these ideas formerly grew. Philosophizing is so far a kind of atavism of the highest order.” Okay so, here’s the idea. There's two fundamental ideas that are embedded in this which actually Nietzsche differentiates. Alright I’m gonna read you another section that illuminates the first one. “It has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up till now has consisted of – namely, the confession of its originator, and a species of involuntary and unconscious autobiography; and moreover that the moral (or immoral) purpose in every philosophy has constituted the true vital germ out of which the entire plant has always grown.” Okay so this is a very radical statement because what Nietzsche is saying is that philosophies, even when they declare themselves rational, are deeply personal, and they're also necessarily embedded within a motivational structure that is either pro-life or anti-life, something like that. So there's no value free philosophizing. What there is is the expression of biologically and culturally conditioned being, which is conditioned by, let’s say the same sort of fundamental forces that Freud described in the biological realm, and then that’s conditioned by the cultural processes that we just described in relationship to Piaget, and then what the philosopher does is observe that all of those things are happening, allow that to be articulated, and confuse that with his own thought. It’s a brilliant idea. Now here's a way of thinking about it. Now, one of the things Piaget said was that once children start to play games - when they're young - collective games, you can watch the children play the collective games, maybe like eight kids are playing marbles or something like that, and then you can take the young kids out of the game and you can ask them what the rules are, and what’ll happen is you’ll get a diverse set - a diverse and paradoxical set - of articulated rules, and what that means is that the children can play the game when they're in the game and when they're in the context of all the other people because in some sense, the game is embedded in pieces in all of them, and as long as they're all there, that all works, but if you pull the child away they don't have the intellectual wherewithal to describe the patterns of behavior that make up the game, and that's only to say that they know things that they can't say because you might say, well the game - the rules of the game come first and then the game emerges, but that's wrong. It’s the game comes first, and only after that do the rules emerge, and of course there's a reciprocal relationship between them because once the rules are somewhat articulated, then the game becomes more structured, you know, and then the rules can become more structured and so on. So the articulation changes the rules. What Nietzsche is saying is that the same thing applies to societies. He says like, insofar as you can consider society a collective game played by millions of people over vast spans of time, it’s a game of games in some sense, and it emerged from the bottom up. It emerged out of biological impulses and interpersonal and social interactions conditioning and shaping everyone’s behavior and perception. And that happened way before anyone could articulate what those rules were. Now remember, when Nietzsche was writing, there was no real sense of how old the Earth was or how old the universe was. I mean, people thought - even the radical people thought - maybe in terms of hundreds of thousands of years, you know, and now we know that the universe is 14 billion years old and that the Earth is 4 billion years old, and that life has been plentiful for 3.5 billion years, you know. So the historical context within which we originated has expanded by orders of magnitude since the last nineteenth century and so then what you think that means is that the way that our games have been organized stretches impossibly back in time. Now I already told you - I believe - the story about lobster dominance hierarchies right. So even lobsters - that’s 400 million years ago. Lobsters arrayed themselves in a social space and they regulate each other, and that means the lobsters essentially have a lobster society, and you know each lobster has biological predispositions that are quite determined. They're quite - the lobster’s quite a deterministic creature, but nonetheless, the way those biological predispositions manifest himself is conditioned and shaped by the social surrounding, and so you think well lobsters started to play games 400 million years ago and you know, as we’ve taken the tremendously long evolutionary journey across that time, we’d been playing social games the whole time and that means that the way that we interact with each other has evolved, and it’s even shaped the way that our biology manifests itself because that's how old culture is, and then out of that as we became more capable of abstraction, and maybe that's - you know, that's something that really took off probably seven million years ago with modern human beings emerging about 150 thousand years ago because we separated from the common ancestor of human beings and chimpanzees about seven million years ago. You can tell that by doing analysis of genetic differences. So the brain expanded very rapidly after that point, and our culture became more and more conscious and articulated and complex and larger and more technological, you know. So it became, in some ways, more dependent on social norms and less dependent on deterministic biological predispositions, but we’ve still been doing that for a very long time. There’s good evidence that, you know, we started using fire about two million years ago, and - forgive me if I’ve told you this already but - you know if you look at a human being, and you look at a chimpanzee, there’s a bunch of things you can see that are very different morphologically. The chimp is much shorter, much much wider, and way more powerful. So like a normal male chimp is about as six times as strong as the strongest Olympic athlete. So, don't mess with chimps. They’ll tear you apart. They're really, really strong and dangerous. But, the chimp is shaped sort of like this, you know. They have a huge gastrointestinal system, roughly speaking, and the reason for that is mostly what they eat is leaves, and leaves have no color or content, and so they have to eat immense numbers of leaves, and leaves are hard to digest so they have to chew them like mad. So the the typical chimp sits around eight hours a day chewing, and then they have this tremendously long gastrointestinal system because it takes that long to extract any nutrients out of leaves. Well, we circumvented that man, as soon as we invented fire, and fire allows us to outsource our digestion because if you cook most things: vegetables, but most importantly meat. If you cook them, they become much more bioavailable, and it takes much less energy to digest them. So that way you can shrink your gut and grow your brain, and so that’s apparently what we did because here we are, relatively slim at least compared to chimpanzees. And so, fire popped up two million years ago. It’s a real cultural revolution, but you know, that’s so old, that cultural revolution, that it completely reshaped our bodies, and so this interplay between biology and culture has been going on for an unimaginably long period of time, and it conditions everything we do. Now, here’s a complicated idea. Okay, so imagine a wolf pack. Now, a wolf pack is a pretty complicated social group. It’s a fair bit like a primordial human group which is why dogs have been with us for 25 thousand years. Maybe they were wolves that first started to follow us around and scavenge, or more likely I think, someone went out - some primordial hunter - went out hunting, killed a wolf female, found the pups, and brought one home for the children to play with, you know. And that was the origin of the dog. I think it was something like that because dogs are basically - they're basically genetically identical with wolves. Now, the thing is, we can get along with dogs, and the reason we can get along with dogs is that dogs have a social organization. You can call it a dominance hierarchy, that’s a fair bit like the human social organization, and so you can see that part of what it means to be human is the same thing that it means to be a pack animal like a dog or a pack animal like our domesticated animals like horses and cows for example, which we can domesticate partly because they're social. So some of the structure of our social organization is the same sort of structure that an animal dominance hierarchy has, like the chimpanzee dominance hierarchy, for example. And so we know that chimpanzees and other primates, monkeys for example, are acutely aware of the levels of hierarchy in their social structure, and there are - I think it’s vervet monkeys. This is a very funny experiment. So imagine that the top vervet monkeys are like celebrity monkeys, you know, and the bottom vervet monkeys are like dissolute street people, and so then you take some picture of dissolute street people who are just at the bottom of the hierarchy, and you take some pictures of celebrities, and you show pictures to a human audience, and the human audience will look at the celebrities longer. Well, if you take the vervet monkeys, and you take photographs of the top ranking vervet monkeys and the bottom vervet monkeys and you show them to vervet monkeys, then the vervet monkeys will look at the top ranking vervet monkey photographs more than the bottom ranking vervet monkey photographs. So in some sense, they're transfixed by the individuals who are higher up in the social order, and that makes sense, right, because what you should feel - especially in a fairly aggressive dominance hierarchy - what you should feel the closer you are to the bottom of the dominance hierarchy, the closer what you should feel for whatever’s at the top of the dominance hierarchy, it should be closer and closer to awe. Now, when people feel awe, they get chills running up and down their back, their neck. Well why - the reason that happens is because it’s an atavism. It’s a hangover from the time that you were threatened by something awe inspiring, let’s say a snake or a bear or something like that. Your hair - your fur would stand up and the reason for that is so that you look bigger, and you still see this happening all the time with cats, right. Two cats will - normally cats face each other this way, right. But if they start to fight, they turn sideways and that's so they each look bigger, and they puff up their fur and their tail, and that's to show the other cat that they're really a lot bigger than the cat first thought. Now of course, they're both doing that so it’s a little bit pointless, but they're just cats so you know, you can give them a break, but the point is that they pilo erect, and that's the same thing that happens, for example when you're listening to very powerful music and it deeply affects you and you get chills. It’s like the hair stands up on the back of your neck, and that's a signalling of awe. Now the reason you should feel awe towards something that's higher up in the dominance hierarchy is because that thing has power, like - well there's more than one reason. A, that thing has power. You better be careful of it because it will put you in your place, and fast. And part of the reason that dominance hierarchy exists is so that everybody knows their place and they don't have to be reminded of it by being half killed on a regular basis, you know. So maybe you're nine on a scale of one being the top, maybe you're number nine. It’s not so good, but number nine and not hurting is a lot better than number nine and lying there bleeding on the ground, and so what happens with dominance hierarchies is they usually arrange themselves in part by power, but by no means only power. Everybody knows where they are, and pretty much everybody stays there, and that even happens over multiple generations, say in complex primate dominance troops. Status is heritable. So you know, there's not much of a leap between that and heritable monarchies among human beings. It’s a reflection of - you know, it’s much more complex among human beings because it’s articulated and structured, but it’s the same basic thing. Now, Nietzsche’s point was - so now imagine… Here’s another problem. So, imagine that… Okay so you've got a dominance hierarchy, and it’s fairly stable, and one of the things that you wanna do is climb to the top of the dominance hierarchy, and the reason you want to do that - there's all sorts of reasons: high quality mates - that's the primary reason. That’s particularly true in humans if you're male because males are much more differential reproducers than females which means a lot of males fail to reproduce completely, and some reproduce a lot whereas the typical woman reproduces at least some. So that means competition is more intense among men, and that's part of the reason why dominance hierarchies tend to be tilted towards male power because competition means more to them. The outcome is more crucial. So, now part of what happens is that as people compete within the dominance hierarchy, what they're doing is to try to figure out who it is that is fit to be on top. Now, you might think that that’s a matter of power, you know, and in fact your basic social leftie, social constructionists would have you believe that was all there is to it, is that the whole dominance hierarchy is nothing but a power system, and the people on top are there because they have power, and what's there is power, and by that they mean the ability to enforce their will on other people. Well that's a dopey theory, and the reason for that is it’s unidimensional. We know that people are multi-faceted. There's no single motivation that's king. You know, for Freud it was sex and aggression, and like if you're gonna come up with a couple of potent candidates, those are two, but there's lots of other ones. People are playful and play is a primary biological circuit, you know. We suffer. We’re hungry. We’re thirsty. We’re affiliative. Like, there's a lot of biological necessity driving the makeup of our personalities, and there are biological subpersonalities and to arbitrarily call one of them the source of something as complex as social organization is - it’s a false form of monotheism. It’s a crazy idea, and it’s the kind of idea that only people who really don't like to think would have because once you come up with that idea, it’s all power, you don't have to think anymore. Someone can say to you, “Well why is complex phenomena X the way it is? Why is the economy arranged the way it is? Well, it’s so the people at the top can maintain their power.” Well, yeah sure, but maybe that accounts for ten percent of the reason. It doesn't get close to a hundred percent. There's lot of reasons why hierarchies are structured the way they are and sheer physical force is one of them, but it’s unstable. So, Frans de Waal who was watching chimps organize their dominance hierarchies in the Arnhem Zoo in Holland, noted quite quickly that it was fairly typical, or at least possible, for the meanest, ugliest, strongest male chimp to be the dominant guy. Sometimes it was the chimp who learned to pick up a garbage can and whack the hell out of it with a stick because that intimidated his enemies, you know. So there's a bit of creativity there, but what De Waal found was that the stable hierarchies were never run by barbarian chimp dictators, and the reason for that was that coalitions of other males would take them out because you think, well if you're one anti-social, aggressive male, and you're tough, it’s like okay you're tough, but three lesser, friendlier males who are bound together in a friendship pact which chimpanzees form quite intensely. It’s like as soon as that guy turns his back or has a bad day or gets hurt, they're going to jump in there and tear him to pieces, and that's exactly what happened. So what De Waal found was that the stabler chimpanzee dominance hierarchies were run usually by males, who were affiliative and gregarious, who remembered their social obligations, so that meant with regard to their friendship network, and who were also very good to the females and the infants in the troop even if they weren't his, and the idea there is that power is an unstable basis for the maintenance of a dominance hierarchy across time because in some sense, even among chimps, you have to have the consent of the governed because you'll get a revolution otherwise. So you know, you're going to get a revolution if you put people, or animals, in a situation where they have nothing to lose, and so what that means is there are constraints on how you can act while you try to move up the dominance hierarchy system because if you're too aggressive and selfish and you're not grooming anyone else, and you're not communicating with the other creatures in the troop, they're gonna gang up on you and take you down, and so if you're gonna maneuver your way up the troop, you have to do it in a manner that's civilized enough so that you don't get everyone against you. So what it means is to maneuver up a power hierarchy, especially a complex power hierarchy, you have to be a lot more than powerful. So, okay now. So, now we’ve got this idea that there are principles governing the movement of creatures up a dominance hierarchy, even among the animals, and one of the defining characteristics that - one of the characteristics that necessity makes delimit that process is that over time, the troop can't let anybody climb the dominance hierarchy who will destabilize the whole dominance hierarchy because then that's it. Game over. So at the very least, you have to learn how to climb up the hierarchy so that you don't destabilize it while you climb because otherwise you get to the top and there's nothing left. Well, and animals know this. They know this instinctively. So for example, when wolves go at it, you know, first they puff up and they growl at each other, and they put up their shoulders, and like they get more and more aggressive until attack is imminent, and often one of them will back up. There's no fighting. No one gets damaged, and so that's the typical situation. It’s like one says, “Yeah okay, I’m out of here.” And god only knows why that is. Often I suspect the wolf with the higher serotonin level wins because it has less negative emotion, and serotonin levels go up as you move up the dominance hierarchy. Now and then, they'll actually have a fight but the fight usually doesn't last very long, and then the loser will roll over, show its throat to the winner, which is quite a behavior because wolves tear the throats out of their prey, and the top wolf will back off, and you know you think about it. That’s unbelievably sophisticated morality. There's echos in there of the New Testament in junction to love your enemy because that's exactly what the wolf is doing, and you know, it doesn't know this because it can't articulate the rule, but what it’s doing is acting as if even the thing that attacked you is valuable in its own right if its a part of your troop. And you know, you can see there the ancient biological origins of the idea, you know, of the equality and value of each individual. So these things have deep, deep, deep, roots. They're not arbitrary. They're not arbitrary, and no one invented them, and that's exactly what Nietzsche is saying here. “To understand how the abstrusest metaphysical assertions of a philosopher have been arrived, it is always well and wise to first ask oneself, what morality do they or does he aim at? Accordingly, I do not believe that an impulse to knowledge is the father of philosophy; but that another impulse, here as elsewhere, has only made use of knowledge (and mistaken knowledge!) as an instrument. But whoever considers the fundamental impulses of man with a view to determining how far they may have here acted as INSPIRING GENII (or as demons), will find that they have all practiced philosophy at one time or another, and that each one of them would have been only too glad to look upon itself as the ultimate end of existence and the legitimate lord over all the other impulses.” So what is he saying there? Well, you know, Nietzsche makes this explicit in passages that are related to this one. He viewed the human being as a collection of subsouls, and the subsouls were grounded in their existence in biological underpinnings, and that was the case for every human being and that made us roughly similar. It certainly made our groups roughly similar, and so these - each of these biological subsystems conceptualized as a subsoul was something that had its own viewpoint, had its own rules, had its own games, and they jockey for precedence. You know, you know that because sometimes you're sitting there reading and you're trying to concentrate on a higher order goal like completing your classes, and you know, some biologically determined subsystem pops up and says you know, “This would be an excellent time to go have a coffee.” You know, and you might do everything you can to not allow that thing to take over, but often it does and often that's despite what you think you might actually want to do, and then later you're all upset about it because you've procrastinated yet again, but you know, Nietzsche viewed the psyche as a place - you could almost think of yourself as a set of abstract, it’s like your brain is a set of animals, and the animals are all dependent on one another but each animal needs to be bossed from time to time, and each animal wants to be bossed more often than it should be, and then you know, the higher order cortical systems are there to figure out how to sequence all the other animals so that they all get what they need without interfering with each other across large spans of time in the presence of many other people in a manner that's sustaining. It’s very, very complicated. Okay now, so let’s go back to the hierarchy. So, you have the hierarchy and over time - now remember, this hierarchy stays there for a very long period of time, and remember as well that the people who climb to the top of the hierarchy are much more likely to leave offspring than the people who don't, and so then what that means is that the hierarchy, in part, is one of the primary selection forces operating on humanity, and what that means is that we evolve towards the thing that can most successfully evolve the dominance hierarchy, and so that means that we evolve towards the thing that has the best probability of ruling properly, and that that’s not just cultural. It’s cultural because it’s the continual interplay between culture and biology going back, we’ll say, four hundred million years or more. Okay now, but it’s even more complicated than that, and this is - one of the things that you have to understand if you really want to understand what Nietzsche meant by the death of God because that's his most famous pronouncement. “God is dead and we have killed him, and we’ll never find enough water to wash away the blood.” So he wasn't announcing that in triumph. He was announcing it in terror. Okay now, imagine this. So as human society becomes more complex, and as our brains become larger and larger so that we could track larger social organizations, and we can organize more complex communities, what happens is that heretofore isolated tribes of people come together, and then they have to engage in conflict and negotiation, and partly what they're in conflict about is what is the way that you should act, and what should the values be. Now there's an old mythological idea that the gods fight in heaven to see who is the dominant god. Well you can imagine all of these individual tribes, they had their ideals, and those were creatures of their imagination, but those were imagined representations of proper behavioral patterns, and they saw those as transcendent and superordinate, and so then tribe A would come into contact with tribe B and the gods would clash, and out of that and all the death and destruction that went with it, the two tribes would integrate, and maybe that would take, you know, hundreds of years, and the religious system that sat above that which was the representation of the dominance hierarchy would also transform. So you take tribe A, and then you take tribe B, and then you take tribe C, and then you take tribe D, and they all accumulate across time and sort out and articulate and represent all of their beliefs, and what happens is that this tribe has a game, and this tribe has a game, and this tribe has a game, and then if you put all of those games together, they tilt so that a metagame emerges out of it. It’s like - if it’s fortunate - the best of all three games gets put together in a larger game, and it has to be the best because otherwise it won't work. The thing will fall apart right, because if your family unit isn't functional, it'll disperse, and you know maybe people will die because of it. It has to have the - it has to be iteratable. It has to be playable across time without falling apart from internal pressure, and without getting wiped out from the outside. So it’s very tightly constrained. So then let’s say this happens over tens of thousands of years. We could say, well it happened in the Middle East because we know that. As Mesopotamia came together, for example, it was the aggregation of multiple tribes and all of the gods of those tribes, and we know the Mesopotamians organized all those gods into one god, his name was Marduk, and that the story that they tell about the aggregation of the gods into one is the story of the gods getting together, and voting on which of them should be at the top, and then we know that the Mesopotamian emperor was charged with the responsibility of acting out that top god, and that that's what made him a good emperor, and he got reminded of that every year with the New Year’s ceremony. He had to tell all the ways that he hadn’t been a good Marduk and then he’d get punished for it, and then they would reenact the battle of the gods and recreate this Marduk character. Okay, so you can understand how that might have come about. Now you can say that the idea of that emergent ideal, that wasn't rational. It was the consequence of conflict and cooperation in the real world across time. The representations of that were, you know, we might think about them as narrative representations or if they're deep enough, even as mythology. We can think about those as the soil from which religious presuppositions emerge, and so what happens is that what you have at the top of the dominance hierarchy as your representation of the good person is no different in its totality than the idea of the sovereign god that has emerged across thousands and thousands of years of human history. So the whole structure has this thing at the top, and it’s regarded in imagination as divine. It’s the consequence of the - it’s the consequence of the battle of representations of morality in imagination across thousands and thousands of years, and that’s a reflection of the actual conflict and restructuring of societies across all that time. So then you have this thing at the top. So we can say in the West, in Western Europe, that thing at the top is Christ, and that's the dying - the dying, and the revivifying hero. We talked about reasons for that. That's the thing that can go to the underworld and then come back up. Okay, that’s at the top. What happens when it disappears? Well, we’ll turn to Dostoevsky for that. This is from “Notes From Underground.” So this is someone who’s in the underground, and that's where you go when your value systems collapse. “I am a sick man. ... I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive man. I believe my liver is diseased. However, I know nothing at all about my disease, and do not know for certain what ails me. I don't consult a doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for medicine and doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently so to respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to be superstitious, but I am superstitious). No, I refuse to consult a doctor from spite. That you probably will not understand. Well, I understand it, though. Of course, I can't explain who it is precisely that I am mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well aware that I cannot "pay out" the doctors and extract revenge by not consulting them; I know better than anyone that by all this I am only injuring myself and no one else. But still, if I don't consult a doctor it is from spite. My liver is bad, well--let it get worse!” Now, he’s a civil servant -- a low ranking civil servant, and he’s retired because he got a little bit of inheritance. He says, “When petitioners used to come for information to the table at which I sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and I felt intense enjoyment when I succeeded in making anybody unhappy. I almost always succeeded. For the most part they were all timid people—of course, they were petitioners. But you know gentlemen what was the chief point about my spite? Well, the whole point, the real sting of it lay it in the fact that continually, even in the moment of the acutest spleen, I was inwardly conscious with shame that I was not only not spiteful, but not even embittered, and that I was simply scaring sparrows at random and amusing myself by it. I was lying when I just said now that I was a spiteful official. I was lying from spite. I was simply amusing myself with the petitioners and with the officers, and in reality I never could become spiteful. I was conscious every moment in myself of many, very many elements absolutely opposite to that. I felt them positively swarming in me, these opposite elements. I knew that they had been swarming in me my whole life, and craving some outlet from me, but I would not let them out -- would not let them purposefully, purposefully would not let them out. They tormented me until I was ashamed. They drove me to convultions, and sickened me at last. At last, how they sickened me. Now, you're not fancying gentlemen, that I am expressing remorse for something now. That I am asking for forgiveness for something. I am sure you are fancying that; however, I assure you I do not care if you are. It was not only that I could not become spiteful. I did not know how to become anything, neither spiteful nor kind. Neither a rascal or an honest man. Neither a hero, nor an insect. Now I am living my life out in my corner, taunting myself with the spiteless and useless consolation that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously, and it is only the fool who becomes anything.” “A direct person, I regard as the real, normal man as his tender mother nature wished to see him, when she graciously brought him into being on the earth. I envy such a man until I’m green in the face. He’s stupid. I’m not disputing that, but perhaps the normal man should be stupid. How do you know? Perhaps it’s very beautiful in fact, and I am the more persuaded of that suspicion - if one can call it so - by the fact that you take, for instance, the antithesis of the normal man, that is the man of acute self consciousness who has come, of course, not out of the lap of nature but out of a retort. This is also almost mysticism, gentlemen, but I suspect this too. This retort made man is sometimes so nonplussed in the presence of his antithesis, the normal man, that with all his exaggerated self consciousness he generally thinks himself a mouse, and not a man at all. It may be an acutely conscious mouse, yet it is a mouse. Well the other is a man, and therefore etc, etc. And the worst of it is, he himself -- his very own self -- looks on himself as a mouse. No one asks him to do so.” And that's an important point. “Now let us look at this mouse in action. Let us suppose for instance that it feels insulted, and it almost always feels insulted, and it wants to revenge itself too. There may even be a greater accumulation of spite in it than in the man of nature and truth. The base and nasty desire to vent that spite on its assailant rankles perhaps even more nastily in it than in the man of nature and truth. For through his innate stupidity, the latter, the normal man, looks upon his revenge as justice pure and simple. Well, in consequence of his acute self consciousness, the mouse does not believe in any justice of it at all. To come at last to the deed itself, to the very act of revenge, apart of the one fundamental nastiness the luckless mouse succeeds in creating around it, so many nastinesses in the form of doubts and questions adds to the one question so many unsettled questions that there are inevitably works up around it a sort of fatal brew, a stinking mess, made up of its doubts, emotions, and of the contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action who stand solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing at it till their healthy sides ache. Of course the only thing left for it is to dismiss all that with a wave of its paw, and, with a smile of assumed contempt in which it does not even itself believe, creep ignominiously into its mouse-hole. There in its nasty, stinking, underground home our insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes absorbed in cold, malignant and, above all, everlasting spite. For forty years together it will remember its injury down to the smallest, most ignominious details, and every time will add, of itself, details still more ignominious, spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own imagination. It will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but yet it will recall it all, it will go over and over every detail, it will invent unheard of things against itself, pretending that those things might have happened, and will forgive nothing. Maybe it will begin to revenge itself, too, but, as it were, piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind the stove, incognito, without believing either in its own right to vengeance, or in the success of its revenge, knowing that from all its efforts at revenge it will suffer a hundred times more than he on whom it revenges itself, while he, I daresay, will not even scratch himself. On its deathbed it will recall it all over again, with interest accumulated over all the years.” Now, the idea that Nietzsche and Dostoevsky were developing was that the dawning consciousness in Western society of the mythological substructure of the value system and the impossibility of conceptualizing that or proving the validity of its structure from scientific means doomed it to - doomed the people who were encapsulated in that system to formal disbelief in it, and what they concluded from that was exactly what Dostoevsky just described which was that someone with that level of acute self-consciousness and culture self knowledge would immediately become fragmented beyond belief, unable to act, unhappy, resentful, and dangerous. And both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche, in their works, and Dostoevsky developed this idea mostly particularly in a novel called “The Devils,” said that once that you had got to that point, which was inevitable if you were smart enough to take seriously what was going on, it was only a tiny step to identification with a murderous ideology. Now, some of the existentialists started to work up what you might regard as a solution to this problem. And I’m going to read Kierkegaard’s solution. “It is now…” Kierkegaard was a Danish existential philosopher and he lived earlier than Nietzsche, and he was, in some sense, you might think of him as the first modern psychologist. He was the first person to conceptualize, for example, of the separate entity of anxiety and despair. “It is now about four years ago that I got the notion of wanting to try my luck as an author. I remember it quite clearly. It was on a Sunday. Yes, that’s it. A Sunday afternoon. I was seated, as usual, out of doors at the cafe in the Fredericksburg Garden. I’d been a student for half a score of years, although never lazy, all my activity nevertheless was like a glittering inactivity, a kind of occupation for which I still have a great partiality, and for which I perhaps even have a little genius. I read much, spent the remainder of the day idling and thinking, or thinking and idling, but that was all it came to. So I sat there and smoked my cigar until I lapsed into thought. Among other thoughts, I remember these. ‘You are going on’, I said to myself, ‘to become an old man without being anything and without really undertaking to do anything. On the other hand, wherever you look around you in life, and in literature, you see the celebrated names and figures, the precious and much heralded men who are coming into prominence and who are much talked about. The many benefactors of the age you know how to benefit mankind by making life easier and easier, some by railways, others by omnibuses and steamboats, and others by telegraph. Others by easily apprehended compendiums and shortly recitals of everything worth knowing, and finally the true benefactors of the age who make spiritual existence easier and easier, yet more and more significant, and what are you doing?’ Here, my soliloquy was interrupted for my cigar was smoked out, and a new one had to be lit. So I smoked again, and then suddenly this thought flashed through my mind: “You must do something, but inasmuch as with your limited capacities it will be impossible to make anything easier than it has become, you must, with the same humanitarian enthusiasm as the others, undertake to make something harder.” This notion pleased me immensely, and at the same time it flattered me to think that I like the rest of them, would be loved and esteemed by the whole community. For when all combine in every way to make everything easier, there remains only one possible danger, namely, that the ease becomes so great that it becomes altogether too great; then there is only one want left, though it is not yet a felt want, when people will want difficulty. Out of love for mankind, and out of despair at my embarrassing situation, seeing that I had accomplished nothing and was unable to make anything easier than it already was, and moved by a genuine interest in those make everything easy, I conceived it as my task to create difficulties everywhere.” Same idea, in different words. “A traveler.” This is Nietzsche, and this is part of the development of the answer to the conundrum that he raised. “A traveller who had seen many countries and peoples and several continents was asked what human traits he had found everywhere; and he answered: men are inclined to laziness. Some will feel that he might have said with greater justice: they are all timid. They hide behind customs and opinions. At bottom, however, very human being knows very well that he is in this world just once, as something unique, and that no accident, however strange, will throw together a second time into a unity such a curious and diffuse plurality: he knows it, but he hides it like a bad conscience why? From fear of his neighbour who insists on convention and veils himself with it. But what is it that compels the individual human being to fear his neighbour, to think and act herd-fashion, and not to be glad of himself? A sense of shame, perhaps, in a few rare cases. In the vast majority it is the desire for comfort, inertia - in short, that inclination to laziness of which the traveller spoke. He is right: men are even lazier than they are timorous, and what they fear most is the troubles with which any unconditional honesty and nudity would burden them. Only artists hate this slovenly life in borrowed manners and loosely fitting opinions and unveil the secret, everybody's bad conscience, the principle that every human being is a unique wonder; they dare to show us the human being as he is, down to the last muscle, himself and himself alone even more, that in this rigorous consistency of his uniqueness he is beautiful and worth contemplating, as novel and as incredible as every work of nature, and by no means dull.” “When a great thinker despises men, it is their laziness that he despises: for it is on account of this that they have the appearance of factory products and seem indifferent and unworthy of companionship or instruction. The human being who does not wish to belong to the mass must merely cease being comfortable with himself; let him follow his conscience which shouts at him: ‘Be yourself! What you are at present doing, opining, and desiring, that is not really you.’” That’s Nietzsche, and Dostoevsky, and existentialism. That’s the bare beginning of the thinking.
So last time, we talked a little bit about the state of the world of belief, I suppose, by the end of the nineteenth century and I talked to you a little about Nietzsche, and Dostoevsky, and Kierkegaard. Um, a very large number of the clinical theories that we’re going to be discussing for another two lectures after this one have been influenced by philosophers, and that's partly why I’m also talking to you about the philosophers. It’s almost as if in some sense the great philosophers have - are tapped directly into the lower strata of our cultural systems of meaning as they move forward in time, and they can outline what those structures are and also describe their weaknesses, and their strengths, and their likely transformations moving forward. You know, I mean obviously people can be behind the times, and it’s just as probable that some people are ahead of the times and we would assume, if you're thinking about it, say, from a Big Five trait perspective that the people who are ahead of the times often are very, very intelligent and very, very open, and of course that's a pretty good definition of a philosopher. So, Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, more than any other two thinkers had their finger on the pulse of the transmutation of cultural systems of meaning at the end of the nineteenth century, and they were both concerned about the fact that the systems of meaning within which Western civilization at least had taken shape, had been fragmented for a variety of reasons, the most important of which was likely the rise of the scientific worldview, and as I detailed to you in the last lecture, both Dostoevsky and Nietzsche believed that that had left modern people because I think in the early twentieth century, it was Western people but I now think it’s reasonable to say that it’s modern people in a state of - they're - of cultural discontinuity. The things - belief systems but also technological systems now have transformed the world so radically that the conflict between modernism and traditional forms of belief is acutely felt everywhere. It’s certainly, I think, one of the forces that have given rise to the battle between Islamic fundamentalism and modernism because it’s more than a battle of Islamic fundamentalism against the Western world, and the problem, fundamentally, is that people typically exist within cultural constructs that are very, very ancient, and that have - that are grounded in evolved systems of meaning that are even deeper than the ones that are articulated and explicit, and when there's a period of very, very rapid cognitive and technological change, then the integrity of those systems starts to… it starts to become questionable from an explicit perspective but it also starts to become insufficient from a practical perspective. So, one example that you might give some consideration to is the fact of the introduction of the birth control pill, for example. If you listen to politically minded people, they make the case that the emancipation of women was essentially a political matter, but I don't think that's a very reasonable way of looking at it at all. Of course, everything feeds back onto itself and there are multiple causal pathways to any end. The radical element in the emancipation of women was of course the development of efficient forms of contraception, most particularly the birth control pill, and it’s the case that as soon as you educate women anywhere in the world, not only does economic productivity arise dramatically, in fact it’s actually the best predictor of increasing economic productivity in a modernizing state is the granting of rights to women. Now whether it’s directly because of the granting of rights to women or because of the existence of an underlying belief structure that allows the concept of right to expand quite rapidly is a very difficult to be sure of, but in any case that exists, and then of course the other thing that happens is that women stop having children unbelievably rapidly. So for example, I think - I believe it’s Iran where this has been most marked over the last two generations, so from family sizes far greater than replacement to family sizes well below replacement in basically one or two generations. It’s a massive transformation, and it’s not necessarily something that anyone expected. It’s part of the sequence of forces that are rapidly allowing our population to reach a peak and either stabilize or decline. Now I don't know how many of you know this, but the projections are there’ll be nine billion people on the Earth within thirty to fifty years, and that’ll be our peak population. After that it will fall rapidly, and you know, you can see that sort of thing happening right now all over the Western world, and it’s happening a lot in China, and it’s happening a lot in Japan where, you know, there are more older people than there are younger people because the younger people aren't having enough children to actually replace the population. So the probability that we’ll peak at about nine billion and then start to fall, it’s not certain but that’s what the best projections seem to indicate now. So what happens anyways with in periods of very rapid technological and cognitive transformation because those things go together that the certainties upon which people base their interpretation of the world and even more importantly, base their judgements about how to act start to become uncertain. So for example, if you introduce the birth control pill into a population, and you put women’s reproductive faculties under their own voluntary choice, then you radically transform virtually all of society’s fundamental social structures, not least marriage, and marriage of course has been regarded classically as the foundation of civilization, and of course, increasingly there are more people who aren't married than there are people who are married. Now, it’s very difficult to know what to make of that because of course there's no setting the clock back, and it’s not even clear that you would want to set back the clock if you could, but expecting cultural constructs, which take centuries or maybe even thousands or maybe even tens of thousands of years to develop, to keep up with change of that magnitude is...it’s not possible. You know, I mean and you guys face technological transformations that are earth-shattering on an almost yearly basis, and you hardly even notice it. I mean, Tinder is a good example of that, you know. I don’t know if you know, but Tinder has produced quite a spike in sexually transmitted diseases, but you know, it’s a radical technology because it’s the first technology that’s ever been invented that enables men to find partners with no fear - with virtually no fear of rejection, and of course that's been a limiting factor for… that’s been a defining feature between the interactions between men and women ever since history began, and so these things are occurring at an extraordinary rate, and of course it’s not reasonable to expect our more slower moving cultural constructs to keep up with them, and that’s partly because as well that, you know, people talk for example about the divisive nature of religion. You often hear people who are critics of formal religion in particular talk about the fact that religion underlies a tremendous amount of destruction and warfare and conflict, and you know, first of all it isn't religion that does that by the way, it’s tribalism, and tribalism characterizes even chimpanzees, and I don't think chimpanzees go to war with each other for religious reasons. So, you know, the religious groupings of mankind are large-scale manifestations of the same phenomena that produce dominance hierarchies in the wild, and of course, large-scale religions unite people within the religion just as much as they divide people on the outside of it, so part of the accumulation of religious tradition across time is a process that allows thousands, and ten thousands, and even millions of people to exist within the same hierarchy of values and exist relatively peacefully as a consequence. Now I’m saying relatively peacefully. You know, a hundred years ago, it was thought that pre, let's say archaic people, so those would be people who are still living a fairly isolated tribal life in small groups - pre - you know, basically operating at the level of stone age technology, let’s say. The idea was - there was a very popular idea for a long time that those cultures were communistic and violence free, and that's wrong. They're not violence free at all. If you track the homicide rates in stone-age cultures, they're way, way higher than they are in civilized cultures, like orders of magnitudes higher, and there's a variety of reasons for that, but I’m just telling you that because you want to dispense with the idea that along with complex civilizations and the spread, say, of unifying religious beliefs, there was an increase in baseline violence because there's just no evidence for that at all. Now, the problem with these large-scale belief systems is they're not very fast, and part of the reason for that is that in order for a large-scale belief system to manifest itself in any reasonable form, it has to be predicated on the mutual agreement of the people within who...within - who operate within its embrace, you know. So, for Toronto to exist as city, as a peaceful city, basically what has to happen is that the vast majority of us have to agree that the rules that govern the city, and the social interactions within the city are useful and just, and because if you don't agree with that, then splinter movements of all sorts start to occur and people become more revolutionary in their modes of action and then they become more violent and the whole system starts to break down. So it’s not easy to establish a collective norm because people have to agree to it, and you can imagine that hammering out agreement with anything, with even a small agreement that affects many, many people, is a process that takes a tremendous amount of time. People can argue forever about the smallest alterations in the systems that regulate our behavior. Now, you know, some of you might be familiar with the terror management theories. How many of you have heard of terror management theory? Okay, well the terror management theories are predicated on the idea that our belief systems protect us from our fear of death. Now exactly how they do that isn't specified particularly well in the terror management theories but the originator of the theory - his name was Ernest Becker who was a sociologist, by the way, and a Freudian - believed that cultural systems enabled us to attribute beliefs to our actions, finite and infinite, so that we could consider ourselves in relationship to mortality and in some sense, hide from the truth of the finitude of our existence. Now, one of the things that terror management theorists don't really give any credence to is the fact that belief systems are not only systems of beliefs, they're systems of action regulation, right. So we talked about the Piagetian notion of a game. I mean, the game exists first as something that everyone can play and only later as something that people represent, and a social culture’s the same way. A cultural… A culture regulates the way that you interact with each other, and what you expect from each, and how you can fulfill your mutual - your needs in relationship to one another and then it’s represented, and the representation might help you find meaning in your life, but the fact of the initial social contract, which is the phenomena that regulates your interpersonal behavior, doesn't protect you from the fear of death, it protects you from dying, and that's a very important thing to note. I mean, you know, all of you know, of course, that it’s very cold out today, and yet here you are in this classroom where it’s, you know, ridiculously comfortable, you know, by classroom standards and of course by standards around the world. You're not freezing to death in here, and that’s not your belief that’s protecting you. It’s the fact that you're embedded in this insanely complicated system of cultural interactions and it just so happens that you get to sit here and listen to a lecture while there's thousands of people beetling around, many of them outside in the cold, making sure that the power grid, for example, that keeps this place warm is properly maintained and functional which takes a tremendous amount of work. So, in during periods of rapid transformation, it’s hard for the social contract to adjust itself so that everyone knows how to behave in relationship to one another, but then it’s also very difficult for the description of that, so the articulated norms that constitute a society; it’s very difficult of them to transform rapidly enough so that they can keep track of the changes and help people decide what they should do, so let me give you an example. So, I had a client a while back who had been raised as a fundamentalist Christian, and she was very… she had been socialized and had come to believe that sex before marriage was wrong, but the probability that she was going to get married before she was 27, or 28, was low for a whole variety of reasons. So then she faced this conundrum, and it was an interesting conundrum from my perspective because, you know, I think that in a well-regulated psyche, sexuality is integrated into the personality so that it plays its role in the - what would you call - in the polity of the self. It’s integrated properly inside, and so it’s under moral control, roughly speaking because it serves its own function plus the function of keeping the person well situated in the present and developing properly in the future, and maintaining proper relationships with everyone around them, but it was quite obvious to me that a lot of the constraints that had been placed on her behavior, as a consequence of her relatively rigid belief were actually interfering with her development as a person, you know, and so one of the things we had to puzzle out was well, exactly what are the moral guidelines that you should use to regulate your sexual behavior outside of marriage if you're not planning to be married for, you know, maybe until your late twenties. Well, you know good luck trying to figure that out. Like it’s a really - it’s a really, really, really, really complicated question, and it’s certainly not obvious that any one person can figure out the answer to that in a single lifetime, you know, even if they thought of nothing else especially because the landscape itself is transforming as you're attempting to adjust to it, and you know, we eventually concluded - although it was a very individual solution - we eventually concluded that there were things that she had forbidden herself to do that were stopping her from establishing any kind of long term relationship at all, and that was interfering with her development, you know, as a mature person, and that the morality that she had used to structure her behavior appeared to be counterproductive at least in, you know, some - in some areas. So, it’s one thing to, you know, to regulate sexuality in the hopes of marriage when you get married when you're, you know, 19 or 20 or 21. It’s a completely different thing, perhaps, when it’s not going to happen until you're in your late twenties. So now, Nietzsche talked a lot, and Dostoevsky talked a lot about the collapse of meaning systems in the late nineteenth century, and you know, that was followed by a very, very rapid period of technological transformation, like that really kicked in in the late 1800’s, which was the, you know, well it was the height of the industrial revolution, particularly in England, and there were modern technologies being thrust out of the industrial revolution like mad, like the automobile, and the airplane, and the electrical light, and the recording devices, and all the things that we’re still elaborating on now, and then of course, apart from the collapse of classic, say, Christian belief, and the introduction of all these new technologies, when World War I hit, the entire monarchical structure of the Western world collapsed and that also occurred, say, with regards to the Ottoman Empire, and that was partly what led to the creation of the modern Middle East, and of course, that still hasn't been sorted out to any greater degree at all. So the monarchical structures collapsed, these ancient civilizations. The Russians underwent their revolution, and were transformed into Communists, and then after World War I, the stress between the potential different ways of structuring societies after the monarchical societies had collapsed was almost unbearable, and people didn't really know what to do. Now, what happened at the end of Nietzsche’s period and Dostoevsky’s period was that the question that both of those people...what? The most important question both of those people asked became the central focus of the development of philosophical idea of ethics in the twentieth century. So you could think about those - about that as a post-religious ethic. Now, the reason I’m telling you this is because, among other things, is because a lot of what psychoanalytic, or psychotherapeutic treatment is about, is about ethics, and that can't be stretched too much because ethics is about how you see the world and how you behave, and so even behaviorists who are technically embedded in the scientific world are still practical ethicists because what they're consistently doing with their clients is breaking down whatever the problems are that are causing them misery, breaking them down into subproblems and trying to figure out solutions that improve their quality of life, like practical, implementable solutions that improve their quality of life not only now, but as they propagate into the future, and that is not a scientific issue. It’s a how to live issue. So, the entire history of the twentieth century, in some sense, political, economic, psychological, was a sequence of attempts to answer the question “When your fundamental systems of ethics collapse, how is is that you should live?” Now, Nietzsche said, very clearly, that there’d be two consequences to the collapse of these systems, and one would be nihilism, the belief in nothing at all, which also regarded as a form of escape from responsibility, so it’s a logical consequence of the breakdown of classical belief systems, but it’s also a cop-out and it’s the kind of cop-out that Dostoevsky explored very deeply in his small, brilliant novel, “Notes from Underground” which describes a person who’s basically slipped -- an intelligent person, and an irresponsible person, who has basically slipped into a pit of meaninglessness where he experiences hatred and resentment and the desire for revenge, and all of the sorts of things that would -- that afflict someone in the underworld who’s got nothing to hold them together, and then of course, Nietzsche also talked about the likelihood that people would turn to totalitarian belief systems, and he particularly discussed Communism as a replacement for religious belief. I can give you a Canadian example of that. So, I heard a Gallup pollster one time. I was at a conference in Ottawa. It’s the only time I’ve ever heard this, and I think it’s an amazing -- it’s an amazing fact. They were looking at the probability that people would be separatists in Quebec, and if you were a lapsed Catholic, the probability that you would be a Separatist was increased ten times, and the reason for that is, you know, Catholicism fell apart in Quebec in the late 1950s. It was one of the last places in the Western world, roughly speaking, where the feudal, in some sense, structures of Catholicism had maintained themselves right up to that point, right up to the 1950s, the late 1950s, and that collapsed precipitously just like belief in Christianity had in Russia, you know, in the late, say, 1880s, and what happened in Quebec was, well first of all, the birth rate plummeted. I mean, I did genetic research in Quebec, and in the 1950s and before that, it was very typical to see families of nine to thirteen children, and of course - but now Quebec has the lowest birth rate, I believe, in the Western world. It’s way below replacement. Everybody bailed out of the church. Nobody gets married, and if you were a separatist - if you were a lapsed Catholic, you were ten times more likely to be a separatist. All that meant was that when Catholicism fell apart, you know, people who still needed to have very structured belief systems just turned to Nationalism as a natural alternative, and that's part of what a -- that’s part of what accounted for the rigidity and utopian… the utopian nature of the Quebec movement towards independence. You know, I remember talking to one of my colleagues, very, very intelligent person, and you know, I asked him because at that point, they were predicting that if Quebec separated, the Canadian dollar would fall to forty cents, forty-five cents US, something like that. It’d be a complete economic catastrophe. I said, well you know the predictions are that if Canada separates, or Quebec separates and no one would know how to do that, is that the Canadian economy will collapse, and of course, that'll collapse the Quebec economy too, and he didn't deny that. He said, yeah but it would be worth it. And I thought, well there's just no way of having a conversation under those circumstances because from my perspective, total, you know, severe economic collapse is a good reason not to do something, but if you believed that the future potential is such that that’s justified, then well there's no arguing with you. It’s just something that decided, and that's the end of that. When I lived in Quebec, as I did for a long time, I learned very quickly never to have a discussion about politics with anyone who was a separatist because it was just absolutely counterproductive, you know. They had axioms of belief that weren't movable, like the future will be good enough so that no matter what price we pay in the present, that will be justified. It’s like, well that's not an idea right. It’s a statement of faith, and you saw exactly the same thing happening, not with the same principles, I’m not saying that, but you saw the same thing happening from a psychological perspective in Russia when the Communists really started to become active in the 1920s when any matter of horror whatsoever was fully justifiable because it was going to bring about some future state that was basically equivalent to paradise. So anyways, and then you know, Dostoevsky pursued the idea of nihilism even farther because Dostoevsky was certainly someone who was willing to go to the ends of an argument, and one of the things he proclaimed was that if there was no god, then anything was permitted, and his basic hypothesis was well if there's no ultimate arbiter of values, if there's no transcendent arbiter of values, then you're radically free. Now, you know, the existentialists would say you could use that radical freedom to find meaning in your life, but one of the things Dostoevsky realized was that you could use that radical freedom for anything that you wanted. So in his book “Crime and Punishment,” for example, he explores the actions and beliefs of a student who was named Raskolnikov, and Raskolnikov is a starving student. He’s a law student, and he doesn't have enough to eat so of course his cognition is a little bit on the addled side because he’s going through periods of starvation and drunkenness, so it’s not like he’s thinking that clearly. He wants to become a law student so that he can help society, and he finds out that his sister is basically willing to enter into a loveless marriage and more or less prostitute herself so that she can generate enough money to share with her mother so that they can fund his continuation through law school, and he thinks that wouldn't be a very good deal. At the same time, he’s indebted to a pawnbroker who everyone hates, who’s an absolutely miserable person in every possible way, and Dostoevsky sets up the situation like that, so the pawnbroker has a niece, if I remember correctly who she basically enslaves and mistreats, and she squirrels away all sorts of money but never does anything with it, lives in absolute poverty, and anyways, he considers her the sort of person without whom the world would be a better place. So having all these things co-occurring in his imagination, he decides that because there are no ultimate arbiters of value, that all morality is essentially cowardice which is kind of the reverse of what nietzsche concluded. He said most people were cowardly and justified that with their morality, but Raskolnikov took the other idea which is “Well why do I have to obey any rules at all. If there’s no ultimate source for all of these rules, it’s just convention and cowardice, and if I have enough strength then I could leap outside of that framework and I can do whatever I want.” So he decides to kill the pawnbroker which he does, and quite successfully, and not only that, he gets away with it, and that's about the first third of “Crime and Punishment,” and the rest of the book is the discussion of the manner in which he comes unglued as a consequence of having performed this act, and it’s a brilliant - it’s an absolutely brilliant study of the way that a value system holds you together even in ways that you don't know, and then if you step outside of that and violate your relationship to it in some really intense way, then there's going to be catastrophic psychological consequences that’ll echo through your whole being. We know that this is more than theory because many people, soldiers in particular who develop Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, develop Post Traumatic Stress Disorder when they observe themselves doing something that they regard as tremendously cruel, or vicious, or immoral, you know, and they're in this situation where, you know, acting in that manner is highly probable. It’s a war situation. It’s usually very intense, and you know, they don't have a lot of time to make decisions, and god only knows, you know, what the specifics are of the particular event, but many, many people come to be so shattered by observing themselves do things they can't believe that a human being would be capable of doing that they never recover, and it’s partly because, you know, that they violate their ethical -- the ethical structure that holds them together, holds all their ideas, and their plans, and their perceptions, and their interactions with other people. That's a unifying field in some sense, and if you violate it and it fragments, then you're left absolutely fragmented and that's not -- that's not even a psychological observation, it’s a psychophysiological observation. You can stress yourself so badly, raise your stress levels so high that your brain starts to become damaged by the stress hormone and, you know, so it’s not just a psychological state, it’s damage to the core of your being in some sense. Now, the collapse of these belief systems and their destabilization was well thought through by these thinkers by the end of the nineteenth century, and then we have the technological transformations, and the sociological and political transformations of the early part of the twentieth century that leaves everyone in a state of confusion, in some sense, like in Germany in the 1920’s. Of course, the Germans had gone through this terrible period of trench warfare, so all their men were brutalized. Some of them had been on the front for months, and that was in the trenches, and then, you know, their political system had collapsed and they put a weakly rooted democracy in place, and the economic system collapsed and Germany went through a period of hyperinflation so that the value of their money basically dropped to zero. So that meant if you were 65 years old, and saved up your whole life to have enough money to retire, and you were a good citizen, you know, and prudent and careful, every single thing you ever owned disappeared, and so at the same time, you know, the Communist revolution had taken place in Soviet Russia, and there was great concern within Germany that the same thing was likely to happen there, and certainly the Communists were always pushing for that because they had the common term, which is the international Communist movement which was devoted to destabilizing, you know, non-Communist governments and producing the preconditions for the revolution, so it wasn't like it was just paranoia, it was a real threat, and it was out of all that mess that came the emergence of the fascists, and the Nazis, and it’s not that, you know, it’s not that surprising because chaos breeds the desire for order. So that was one direction that people could go, you know, instead of following some abstract Messiah, let’s say, the sort of idea that was embedded in classical Christianity, they realized a new Messiah, and that was Hitler, and that certainly didn't seem to be any improvement, you know, because Hitler was really a messiah of destruction and fire, and you know, the World War II killed about a hundred and twenty million people, and of course, it left Germany in absolute ruins, and Hitler killed himself in his bunker underneath Berlin while it was burning and the Russians were advancing into, you know, into Germany, and they were not happy. You didn't want to be a German national while the Soviets were advancing towards you after your country had invaded theirs, pushed them back halfway across the Soviet Union, you know, and produced a tremendous amount of damage and distress. It was an awful situation, you know, and the messiahs that the Russians turned to: Lenin, and Stalin were barbaric and brutal beyond comprehension, and you know it’s a strange thing, you know, we’re not very well educated in what happened in the Soviet Union in the twentieth century. We know far more about what happened in Germany, say with the Holocaust, and you know, it’s very important that people should know about that, but there were tens of millions of people brutally destroyed in the Soviet Union, and you know, partly because they were murdered by people who were, at least in principle, motivated by left-wing utopian visions. We seem to… our education system seems to regard that as somehow more forgivable which it certainly isn't. So, you know, the whole generate secular alternatives to religious belief issue didn't seem to work out very well, and then the nihilism alternative -- well that has its own problems, you know. One problem is the sort that Dostoevsky talked about, you know, and you see the kids who go up and shoot up high schools and explode in rage, you know. They're often people who feel that they have no meaning in their life, that life itself is contemptible and that suffering is too extreme and that they bear the brunt of unfair reality, and you know, they develop unbelievably dark and destructive theories of revenge and mayhem over, sometimes over the period of years and then they go out in the world and lay those things out, and it’s not like their thinking is irrational, you know. It’s coherent. It’s just predicated on principles that you might not agree with, such as, you know, the principle that “everyone I don’t like deserves to die,” but you know, in the absence of a really formal way of demonstrating that such thoughts are not only immoral, but wrong, you know, in some absolute sense, it’s very difficult to come up with ways of defending ourselves against those two extremes, you know. The extreme of destructive nihilism, and the extremes of ideological possession. Now, Nietzsche started to work out some solutions to this, and I just started to touch on those at the end of the last lecture. You know, Dostoevsky’s solution was a return to Christianity, fundamentally, and its revivification, and that was the same tact that Alexander Solzhenitsyn attempted to lay out, and also Tolstoy in Russia, you know, and I’ll talk to you about that a little bit more in the next lecture. Dostoevsky -- or Nietzsche’s idea was that people would have to… he said, you know, in his quote about the death of God, that people would have to become like gods just to be able to tolerate the consequences of this dismemberment of the previous civilization, and he believed, well his thinking on this, I would say, is somewhat fragmentary. I mean, Nietzsche was a great critic of Christianity, institutionalized Christianity, and a great diagnostician. He could say what was rotten at the core of Western civilization, we’ll say modern civilization, but when it came to actually describing what to do about it, well he didn't live that long, you know. He died a fairly young man. There's actually a video of Nietzsche in the mental hospital online. I just found it the other night. I had no idea that he was ever captured on video, but there's video from -- movie from about 1899 showing him in a mental hospital where he ended up in his early forties. So he talked about the development of the being he called the overman, which is often translated as superman, and his idea was that people would have to take onto themselves the burden of creating new systems of meaning and new moralities that were suited to them, that they would have to create new values. Now, Jung took Nietzsche’s diagnosis very, very seriously, and you can certainly say that Jung was as much influenced by Nietzsche as he was by Freud, and I would say in some ways, he was influenced more because one of the things that Jung was trying to do was to identify where the loss values had gone. So the Nietzschean idea is that it’s possible for human beings to create their own values. Now, there's a problem with that, and there's a variety of problems with that, and one is that it doesn't seem exactly true in that, you know, and a lot of the existentialists who followed Nietzsche, like Jean-Paul Sartre for example, believed in the radical freedom of human beings, that we were doomed to be free, in a sense, and it was absolutely necessary for us to conjure up our own meanings and values because fundamentally, we face the void and, you know, life was nasty, and brutish, and short, to use Hobbes’s terms, and that we had to be able to confront that and live despite it, and well, there's a variety of problems with that solution. The first one is, well, if you come up with your systems of values, there's no reason -- and I come up with mine, there’s no reason to assume that they're going to be sufficiently integrable so that we don't have to fight each other to the death. That's a big problem. So, you know, you have every single person with their own system of beliefs. Well, fine, except how do -- in a sense, that's a structured, kind of philosophical anarchy. Well, okay, maybe that's good if you happen to live alone on an island, but if you're stuck with all these other people, then that becomes a very difficult thing to manage, and I think it’s partly for that reason that Sartre famously said, “Hell is other people,” you know, because he thought of the other, in some sense, that which was not him, as a suppressive force that stopped him from manifesting his destiny in the way that would have been best for him. Well, you know, hell might be other people, but that doesn't mean that -- first of all that's a very one-sided way of looking at things because, of course, hell is other people. Hell is you too, and you know, hell is nature. There's lots of places that you can find hell, but by the same token, you know, the most meaningful elements of people’s lives are often in their social relationships, and you can't lay everything at the door of pathological society, you know, and we shouldn't forget as well that Sartre didn’t… what -- come up with any reasonable critique of the Communists until the late 1960s, and you know, that was a little late. People with any sense, like George Orwell, had figured out that the whole Soviet experiment had become radically murderous by the early 1940s, and so Sartre, you know, proposed radical freedom as a… as the existential response to the unveiling of no meaning, but when it came right down to it, he couldn't resist identification with a totalitarian structure, so I don't see any reason why we should really pay any attention to what he had to say. So… and now there's another problem with the idea that people should create their own values, and that is that it’s not so simple, you know, and the problem seemed to be that you don't obey yourself very well. You know, you can say, “Well here’s my code. I’m going to live by it.” So, and let’s do that simply to begin with. You say, “Well I’m going to study very hard and do well at my classes,” just for the sake of argument, you know, but you don't, you know. You procrastinate, and you have a paper you're supposed to read, and you know you're supposed to read it, and you need to read it for reasons that are hypothetically important to you, but there's no damn way you can get yourself to sit down and read it. Your attention wanders, and you go to do three or four stupid things, and you feel terrible about it, like you feel like you're betraying yourself, and maybe this is a continual pattern in your life, but one of the things you find out is that you don't get to create your own damn values because, for some reason, you're not in charge of yourself, and of course that's where the psychoanalytic idea started to come from, you know, Freud notices -- this is in the aftermath of Nietzsche -- that you're not the master of your own psyche, you know, that there's many sub-yous inside of you and that they don't all want the same thing, and so the idea that you can generate your own meaning is very -- it’s an insufficiently developed idea because there's a lot of meaning-making generators residing within you, and not only do they not all point in the same direction which is a huge problem, but they don't even necessarily -- they don't necessarily lay themselves out in some integrated fashion across time, and they don't necessarily operate together in a way that's going to enable you to find your place with other people and in society. So, you know, make your own meaning. Well, which part of you, you know? You're not a unified thing. So that's a big problem, and then well these other problems just remain unaddressed completely. Well, one answer to that, and this is the answer that the more radical existentialists took is that well, society has to be reconfigured, but you know, we kind of know where that leads too. When people are doing radical societal reconfiguration, at least as far as we’ve been able to tell, most of the time that's an absolute, murderous, catastrophe. So, you know, it’s reasonable -- it seems reasonable to me to presume that those experiments have already been run. Alright so, now Jung, like Dostoevsky, was very interested in returning to sources of meaning from which he believed that our original religious ideas had emerged, and this is partly his notion of the collective unconscious. So, you know, part of the radical critique of religious systems is predicated on the idea that there's something like conscious beliefs, you know, there are articulated beliefs that you could lay out in a credo, but that's not right. It doesn't seem to be correct at all, and Nietzsche actually knew this, you know. He knew that a lot of our social institutions had emerged from the bottom up and had only become articulated after they had been embodied and danced out essentially, you know. You -- a tribal group learns how to organize itself over thousands and thousands of years of trial and error and pushing against each other, and so forth, and they come into that tribal grouping with a biological substrate, and their sociological and political interactions are constrained by all of those things, and then maybe they come up with a description of that, over time, a self-description, and an articulated representation, and that's the religious system. It’s not that the religious system is thought out first, as a system of metaphysical presuppositions, images, and dreams, then turned into rules, then imposed on the population who then obeys it, and generally speaking, when people criticize formal religion, they criticized it assuming that that's how it developed, you know, and that's kind of a Marxist idea, for example, that religion is the opiate of the masses, and that you know, the religious structures were laid out so that a small elite could control the population. Now, you know, in virtually every domain, a small elite emerges that dominates the population. I don't care what domain you look at. So Marx is accurate in that way, in that, you know, there's always a power imbalance between elite minority and a non-elite majority, but to say that that's the cause of all the systems that people interact within is, well it’s unsophisticated beyond belief. What it does is that it takes phenomena that are complex beyond comprehension and reduce them to one thing. It’s not helpful, like you know, here’s an example. If you sampled popular songs on YouTube, let’s say you made a graph of how popular songs were. What you find is that about ten songs, at any given time, are played -- half of all the songs played at any given time are going to be one of ten songs. Well, and then what the other thing you’d find is that half of all songs played are played by one or more of ten musicians, and that's true no matter if you look all the from the 1930s to now, if you look at popular music, you see the same thing. Almost everything that almost everyone listens to is created by very few people, and then there's millions of musicians, but you've never heard of most of them and you'll never hear a song from most of them. It’s a small minority, and what you see is in any field of creative production, this happens. A small elite emerges, and dominates the entire landscape. Now, you know, it would be kind of ridiculous to assume that the ten most popular singers and musicians that are currently operative were those who gave rise to the system that allowed them to thrive. I mean, obviously that's a dopey idea, and it’s no more an intelligent idea when you look at any other domain where there's tremendous variation, and the emergence of an elite. It’s a very common phenomena. It happens, as I said, it happens anywhere there's creative production, and so that's why one percent of the people, you know, roughly have fifty percent of the money. It’s no different in other creative domains. Now, we’ll talk later in the course about why that happens, but to think it’s because those people set up the system so that they could thrive is -- well there’s an element of that, obviously, because once you're rich, you're going to prefer political policies that help you stay rich, but that doesn't mean you set up the whole damn system that made you rich to begin with, plus it’s not the same people over any reasonable span of time. So, the one percent of people who have most of the money, it’s always one percent, but it’s not the same people, you know. Each individuals tend to hold on to money for very short periods of time, and big companies don't last very long, you know. They last on average about 30, 35, 40 years, and that's it, then they disappear. So, and it’s because, you know, the economic landscape is just churning like mad. It’s very difficult for a company to -- you know, there's not that many big steam coach companies anymore, you know, and nobody make zeppelins, and nobody makes typewriters. You know what I mean, it’s things move quick, and just because you dominated the landscape at one particular moment doesn't mean you're going to be able to do it at the next. Alright, so the create your own meaning thing is a rough one, and then there's another problem too which is “What makes you think you have enough time?” You know, lots of times people come to me and they have relationship problems, and part of the problem is that they've set their relationships up outside of social norms, and they do that, so they'll say something to me like well we’re not going to get married because marriage is just a piece of paper, which is really a stupid thing to say, like it’s an incredibly stupid thing to say, but underneath that, there's this idea that they want to remain free of social constraints so that they can negotiate their own way, like if you're giving them credit, for you know, wanting freedom instead of just escaping responsibility, but the problem with that is, it’s like okay, good luck. Try it. I don't know why you would assume that you have enough time in the thirty or forty years that you're going to be pursuing relationships to actually figure out how they should run. You don't have a hope of that, and it’s worse too because very, very few people can negotiate, you know, because here's the way it works. You either adhere to the social order, or you stand outside it. As soon as you stand outside of it, you're in a chaotic place because there's no guidelines, and then you either live chaotically because there's no guidelines or you start to formulate order, but to do that, you have to know what you want, and you have to know how to express it, and then you have to figure out what your partner wants, and then help them express it and then you have to negotiate a solution. Well, I would say one in twenty people know how to negotiate. It’s really, really difficult. I mean, just think of the steps. First of all, you have to know what you want, and then you have to admit it to yourself. Well, yeah right, like you're not even gonna get to the first one in all likelihood. What do you want? A lot of what you want can't be articulated even, you know. I’ll give you an example. So, there's a great study done awhile back on prediction of relationship longevity. Okay, so here was the question. “How many negative interactions do you have to have, per set of positive” -- sorry. “How many positive interactions, per negative interaction, do you have to have with your partner in order for the relationship to remain stable?” Okay, so let's say you have one negative interaction to every one positive interaction. Okay, or maybe you have ten negatives to every positive, then you can imagine a different situation where you have a hundred positives to one negative, right, spanning the whole potential continuum, and you use that to predict relationship satisfaction and longevity. Well, you might think, well god obviously, a hundred positive to one negative is where the preferable ratio and so it’s those people who, you know, their relationship is nothing but constant compliments and bliss. They're the ones who last. It’s not true. What you see is that there's an optimal… an optimal ratio domain. If it falls below five to one positive to negative, then your relationship falls apart. It’s too negative, and it’s partly because people feel negative emotion more than they feel positive emotion because you can be hurt more than you can be pleased, and so one that's only five to one is too punishing, and people won't stay in it, but if you get above to eleven to one, it gets not punishing enough, and then you think well what does that mean exactly? Well, what do you want in a relationship? Well you think, bliss. It’s like, that isn't what you want, as it turns out. It’s more like you want someone to contend with, you know. You don't want a pushover. You don't want everything just to be easy, you know, and this is the sort of… the sort of phenomena that Kierkegaard was talking about when he talked about deciding to make things more difficult for people because that's what they need. You know, you know this perfectly well because if you go outside with someone and they worship you, and they dolt on your every word, and there's nothing but positive feedback coming from them, you lose respect for them almost instantly, and you go wander off and find someone whos more interesting, and part of the reason for that, I think, is that you want the person that you're with to challenge you so that not only do you do reasonably well day to day together, you know, so that you can co-exist in the same space with a reasonable amount of peace, but you also want there to be enough tension in the relationship so that you're both involved in a process of mutual transformation. Well, try specifying that in an articulated way, you know. Good luck. You know, and it also explains strange things about people like the fact that they'll stay in pretty negative relationships, like what the hell are you doing there? If you’d articulated it two years ago, and you said, “Well I want to be with someone I’m miserable with half the time,” of course, you're never going to say that, but it could easily be that that's what you're after. So well...so alright now, Heidegger is another philosopher who was attempting in some sense to solve the problems that were laid out by Nietzsche and Dostoevsky, and the way that Heidegger began to resolve them was by taking a radically new look at philosophy itself, and he was one of the prime phenomenologists, and I told you awhile back that the phenomenologists decided to reconstitute Western philosophy so that it was focusing on being instead of knowledge, and so the hardest thing to grasp about the phenomenologists is what exactly they meant by being, and -- so I’ll give you a… I’ll give you an overview of that. So that's where the term “da sein” comes from, and that's a German term, and it means “being there.” So right now, you're encapsulated in a da sein, and the da sein is the totality of your experience, and that experience would be an experience of an extended world, the natural world, and then the social world, and then inside that, the world of your subjective experience, and that constitutes being, and the phenomenologists make the case -- they're not playing the subject-object game, they're standing outside the division between subject and object that's part of the scientific worldview. So it’s a real paradigm shift in that you can't use the rules from the old way of looking at things inside the new way of looking at things. You have to start with new presuppositions. So we might say, well, one of the things that you're going to do if you look at things phenomenologically is to assume that everything that you experience is real. So then, we would say that there's no attempt, in a phenomenological world, to reduce pain to something material. Pain stands as -- stands itself as a phenomena. So does anxiety. So does joy. All the things that the scientists of consciousness call qualia, which are viewed by them as qualities of the objective world, aren't viewed that way by the phenomenologists. They just say those are primary elements of being. So -- and it’s a very interesting way of looking at things because it kind of allows you to reclaim the validity of your own experience. You can no longer say, “well that only subjective.” Now that doesn't mean that everything you claim subjectively is true, objectively or for other people. What it does mean is that everything that you experience subjectively is real. Now that doesn't mean you have to not think about it or take it apart or categorize it properly, you still have to do all of those things, but you're put into a place where there's no need to deny the reality of your own experience, or to subordinate it to something else. So, for example, if I’m doing dream analysis with someone, which I do often, if people dream, because dreams, as Jung pointed out, are… they're manifestations of being. You don't come up with them. They appear to you. They sort of appear out of nowhere, in some sense. They manifest themselves. They do it strangely, and I think the reason for that is that they contain unarticulated thought, but if you can get a handle on them and assess them, then sometimes they can tell you things that there's no other way you can figure out, and what's really cool about them is that they're -- they have the same personality as phenomena in the, like the broader world of experience have, you know. You don't ever think about the truth of a chair. It’s just there, and dreams are like that. They're just there, and if you can untangle what they have to -- what they indicate, then you can get a take on your own experience that's not altered by any of your local subjective wishes and desires. I hate to use the word subjective in this sort of context. So, phenomenology is the study of being. Now, and -- in being, there are variety of aspects, and so one aspect -- I’ve never remembered the names of these, but I’ll get it here right away. Oh yes. Heidegger broke the world of experience, being, into three basic categories. There was the umwelt, which I think is basically the world beyond culture and the individual. There's the mitwelt, and that's the world that we share with everyone else, so that's roughly the social world and the social structures, and then there's the eigenwelt which is that domain of experience that's unique to you, that other people can't partake in. So those are the elements of being, as far as the phenomenologists were concerned, and in those domains of being, different experiences manifest themselves. We talked about some of the ones that would be manifestations of the eigenwelt. Scientists would call those things emotional or motivational states. Normally, people think of them as feelings. I would say, “I feel thus. I feel such and such,” and those are experiences that manifest themselves to you or that you have, depending on how you look at it, that are indicative of the manner in which you act in relationship to being. Now, one of -- part of the reason that this is relevant to psychotherapy in particular is because the phenomenologists were very interested in the manifestation of meaning. So you could say, well, nihilism is the absence of meaning, and totalitarianism is the fixedness of meaning, right, if you're a totalitarian, what you do is say, “All meanings exist in relationship to this structure.” It’s almost as if -- the phenomenologists would say you're trying to reduce the umwelt, which is the natural world, the mitwelt, which is the social world, and the eigenwelt, which is your own world, you're trying to reduce all of that to the mitwelt so that everything falls under an explanation that's granted to you by some higher authority, and then of course, the nihilists are having none of that. They see -- they use their eigenwelt, I would say, their own world to invalidate meaning in any domain. Now the phenomenologists would say, well it’s a mistake to use your rationality to undermine the sense, the manifestation of meaning, and I can give you an example of that. So let’s say you're a good nihilist, and you think maybe you're going to go do something difficult like put yourself through university, and then you think in a relatively depressed state of mind, maybe you encounter some obstacles of one form or another, and you think, “Oh to hell with this. Who’s -- What difference does it make anyways? Who cares if I go and get my degree, you know. None of this knowledge is particularly relevant or meaningful and who the hell’s gonna know the difference in a million years?” And so you think, well that's a perfectly rational dismissal because who is gonna know in a million years or let’s say, well even if you can make case that someone might know, there might be some effects left of you in a million years, then we’ll just multiply it by a hundred thousand and go to a trillion years. So here you are, you're this little tiny speck on a slightly bigger speck in the middle of a galaxy that has god only knows how many billion stars, and then there's a billion of those galaxies, although there's way more than that, and they're spread across this tremendous expanse of time, and in the face of all that, who cares what you do? Well, what a phenomenologist would say is, okay, let’s look at how meaning manifests itself when you alter your own private world in a variety of manners. So let’s say, you're trying to do something -- maybe you're working in a -- maybe you're working as a volunteer in a hospital helping sick kids, you know. You're reading to them so that they're distracted from their pain, and you say well, in a trillion years, who’s gonna know the difference and so you think, well it’s meaningless to do this, and the phenomenologists would say, if the frame of reference that you're using, like if you're imposing -- if you're transforming the way your being manifests itself so that it becomes meaningless and absurd, then you should try experiencing it in a different manner. So, it’s a -- see, because a rationalist in some sense, the phenomenologists would say, a rationalist can't deal with the argument “What difference is it going to make in a trillion years, and here you are, a little dust speck among all these other dust specks. It’s ultimately meaningless.”A phenomenologist would say, “Maximize the meaning. That's the marker of truth.” It’s a completely different way of thinking about it. So he would say, for example, that if you're going to a hospital and you're reading to sick children, that the frame of reference that you should use, the way that you allow that experience to manifest itself, should be such that the experience manifests itself so that it’s as meaningful as possible rather than as meaningless. The idea being that just because you can twist your own experience so that certain elements of your being become meaningless does not mean that that’s right. The fact that it becomes meaningless actually means that it’s wrong because you think, you see, it all depends on what you allow to be primary, and this is the phenomenologist point. If you allow your strict rationality to be primary, then if it can attack something and destroy it, then that thing is worthy of being attacked and destroyed. But if you flip it around and say, well what you should be doing is allowing -- is interacting with your experience or allowing your experience to manifest itself in a manner that situates you most meaningfully in the here and now, whatever framework you're using to do that that works is right. Well it’s a completely different way of looking at things and it’s a real -- it’s a real escape from the pathology of rationalism, you know, because it isn't obvious that what you think should take priority. Now, the phenomenologists would go farther than that. They would say that -- and this is something… so here's a way of thinking about it. So Binswanger said, “What we perceive are first and foremost” -- Binswanger was a psychiatrist who was very much influenced -- Binswanger and Boss are the people we’re going to talk about mostly -- were very much influenced by Heideggerian ideas. They say, “What we perceive are first and foremost not impressions of taste, tone, smell, or touch, not even things or objects, but meanings.” Okay, so the idea for the phenomenologists is that what being is made out of is meaning. It isn't that the objective world is made out of things, it’s that being is made out of meaning. Now some of those meanings can be positive, and some of them can be negative, and some of them can be neutral, but the fundamental constituent elements of being -- the fundamental constituent element of being is meaning, and then there is an argument between Binswanger and Boss about how that meaning manifests itself. So Binswanger would say that, “You endow meaning on the world.” So that's kind of a Nietzschean idea, that you create your own values so that you have within you something that he called an a priori ontological structure. It’s a world designer, a matrix of meaning, that determines how the world manifests itself to you. Now, the easiest way to think about that is that, you know, you're thrown into a particular time and place -- that's another existential idea and that's part of the absurdity of your life, is that you're here, now, in this particular context and situation. It’s something you have to contend with, and that's true for everyone. There are arbitrary preconditions to everyone’s being, and one of those arbitrary preconditions is the structure through which you look at the world, and that structure enables some things to be highlights and some things to be ignored, and so, the way that meaning manifests itself is a reflection of this a priori ontological structure, the a priori mode of being. So, there can't be being, which is to say your experience, for the sake of argument, without the structure that consists of -- that you consist of, and so that's a given, and it’s the action of that structure that determines the meaning of things. Now, Boss would say exactly the opposite. He would say, that's the wrong way of looking at it. You should look at the totality of your existence, which is partly the broad natural world, the cultural world, and your own world, and you should note that meaning arises in different places of its own accord. You can't -- you can't reduce it to the action, say, of this ontological a priori, ontological structure, and so one example would be, well what about the meaning of things you don't understand? Well it’s hard to understand how the meaning of things you don't understand can be attributed to what you understand. The meaning seems to be there, to begin with. So here's an example. You're - you have a relationship with someone, and you discover that they have an affair. Well, the discovery of the affair is going to be something that's going to be meaningful. Now, you don't know what the meaning is. You're going to interpret it to begin with, likely very negatively, except to the degree that part of you would like to escape out of the relationship, right, because sometimes if you're betrayed, you're happy about it because it’s time for that to be over with. In any case, there are things that you can encounter that you don't understand that are meaningful in and of themselves. So, I think that you actually can't separate your structure from the structure of everything. They’re always interacting, and meaning emerges out of the interplay of them. So, here’s another way of thinking about it. You're reading a book. The book is meaningful. Where is the meaning? Is it in your head? Is it in the book? Well, it’s very difficult to say, right, because obviously there's a subjective element to it. There's an element that's unique to you, but just as obviously, that meaning wouldn't manifest itself if it wasn't for the book, and of course the book wouldn't be meaningful if you and the book weren't embedded in this complex structure, and so the meaning is an emergent property -- the meaning is an emergent property of the interplay of all of the elements of being. That's a very interesting way of looking at things, so you have all these elements of being, and their dance produces meaning of one form or another. Now, you might say, if you were a phenomenologist, that some of that meaning is going to be life sustaining, and some of it is going to be life destroying, and the phenomenologist would say from a clinical perspective, that you’re -- if you’re… if you exist in a system of meaning revelations that are life destroying, that you should turn your attention away from them towards meanings that are life affirming, and you know, one of the things that’s quite interesting about the phenomenological perspective is that you could experiment with it quite easily. So I could say to you, for example, a couple of phenomenological experiments, one would be, for the next two weeks, you want to detach yourself in some sense, so that you're a curious observer of your being. You're not necessarily trying to direct it, you know, you're just trying to let it unfold, and then what you might want to watch for is when the meaning that manifests itself as things flow around you is clearly meaning of the life affirming type. Now you’ll see that, you know, it depends on how well situated you are in some sense because if you're -- if you're surrounded by -- if your experiential field is primarily negative, these are going to be relatively rare events, but they will still not be non-existent. That might only happen for a few seconds, or a few minutes everyday, or every two days, but so say, okay you notice all of a sudden that you're in a place where things are the way you would like them to be. So you could say you're in a place where being is manifesting itself as acceptable. Okay, so that's a place where nihilism is not appropriate. It doesn't apply because the quality of the experience is such that it’s life affirming. You have to notice that. It’s something that happens, and then you might ask yourself, well okay, what are the preconditions that enable that -- what are the preconditions that enabled all of the different subelements of being to work harmoniously together at that time and place so that that was the meaning that emerged? And then the next question might be, how would it be possible for me to allow that to happen more frequently? And so you can tilt yourself towards life affirming meanings and away from… from, say, meanings that are associated with despair and nihilism, but you do that partly -- it’s almost like you're navigating in a boat. In fact, I think you are. I think you're navigating to find the line between order and chaos because that's where the meaning is. That's exactly where the meaning is, and you could feel it like it’s a place, and that's the other thing that phenomenologists are trying to get across. These things are real. They're not secondary manifestations of some deeper reality. They are reality itself. I also think, and we’ll talk about this more when we get to the neuropsychological portion of the course, that your brain is actually set up first and foremost to detect meaning. You detect meaning before you detect object, and it’s partly because you have to detect meaning so that you know what to do when something happens very rapidly, and there are times when you have to figure out what to do before you have enough time to even see what’s there. You just don't have the time, and so you know, part of the question is well, what exactly do you mean by meaning, you know. I think meaning is significance for behavior or significance for the structure that governs behavior, but those are very, very basic fundamental perceptions. They're not -- you see the object, and then you derive the meaning. It’s exactly the opposite in many cases. You perceive the meaning and derive the object, and there's plenty of neurophysiological evidence for that. For example, you have lots of, you know, your retina is a pattern detector, and the retinal information is transmitted to your brain along the optic nerve, but the optic nerve branches and it goes lots of places in your body. Some of it maps right onto your spinal cord, so that your eyes can make your body move. Some of it maps onto your amygdala so that what you perceive are the meanings of facial expressions, without even perceiving the face. So you can have people who have blindsight, a damaged visual cortex, you can show them angry faces which they say they can't see, but they'll respond to them electrophysiologically as if they're being exposed to something negative, and it’s because the retinal pattern is manifesting itself right onto the system that maps one form of meaning. So you can clearly have meaning without object perception, and so the idea that you derive the meaning from the object -- you see the thing, and then you attribute meaning to the thing -- that's right at some levels of analysis, but it’s wrong at many other levels of analysis. And so, the other thing that I think that you can try that’s phenomenologically informed. This is quite an interesting trick. It’s really hard on you though, so be careful if you try this. So, one other thing that you can try for two weeks is to watch what you say. You got to detach yourself again. You have to remove the belief that your thoughts and you are the same thing, and then you have to watch mostly what you say, and then you have to see -- and this is something that Rogers would also be an advocate of -- you have to see if what you say makes you feel -- you have to see if what you say improves the quality of your being or makes it worse, and you know, if you stop believing in what you say and watch what the consequences are instead, how it manifests itself in terms of a transformation of being, then you can also learn how to only say things that improve the quality of being. Well, that's a good thing if you can manage it, but it’s terrifying in some sense because one of the things that you’ll find is that hardly anything that you say does that. Most of it is neutral, but a fair bit of it has exactly the opposite consequence. It makes things worse. So, I think I mentioned that the word phenomena -- that's where the phenomenology, the term phenomenology comes from, obviously. The term phenomena means -- it’s from the Greek word, “phainesthai,” and phainesthai means “to shine forth.” And so, the phenomenologists’ argument is that being is made up of meanings that shine forth for you and that those different meanings attract you. They're like -- they're like guideposts that you can follow. So you know, one of the -- I’ve noticed this, for example, in relationship to reading. So I’ll be reading a complex text, and some passage will really strike me. So it manifests itself as meaningful. Why is that? Well, you know, one of the phenomenologists, which would be Binswanger, would say, well it’s because of the way that I’m structured, but Boss would say, well no, it’s a dance that's occurring within the structure of everything and the consequence of that is the manifestation of this meaning. Well, what I found is that I can follow threads of meaning through books, you know, that it’s like it’s something that's guiding me, that sense of meaning, and often if I find something within a book that's meaningful, then I’ll read the other things that that person wrote, and I’ll see that some of the people that they read have meaningful things to say, and then I can branch out that network, and it’s following a pathway that's laid out for you, in some sense it’s laid out for you in the world, and you know, the phenomenological idea is that if you follow that pathway, then what happens is being becomes more and more integrated around you, and those experiences of intrinsic meaning start to multiply and increase in intensity, and you know, if you're able to do that over a long period of time, then you can get more and more of the totality of your being revealing the kind of meanings that's stopped you from being either nihilistic or totalitarian. And so, well, that's the basic -- that's the fundamental theory of phenomenological psychotherapy, you know. You might first say, well you know, you're depressed and anxious and your life isn't going very well. What keeps you afloat? It’s something to observe, and then we might say, well are there ways that we can expand that small area that's keeping you afloat so that it starts to occupy more and more of your experience and push back the parts that are either neutral or negative, and you know, it’s a -- it’s in large part a consequence of attention, and willingness to first of all, treat things as if their meaning is real, and then second, to allow that reality to transform the way that you experience the things in the future. See you Thursday.
Hi, guys. So we’re going to talk about the brain today. Last lecture I talked to you a little bit about construct validation and what it means to measure something and so, we’re going to take a bit of a detour. So I told you about measurement problems last time. If you do your measurement properly in psychometrics—if you’re studying personality, if you’re studying individual differences—there are roughly six things that you can discover and they can be broken up different ways. That’s the big five model: extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, contentiousness, openness, and they can be subdivided as you should know because, in principle, you’ve read the paper that subdivided them into ten. That turns out to be quite useful, but for now we’ll just presume that there are five, and then the other factor of human function that’s pretty easy to derive and measure is IQ. Now, IQ likely nests under openness because openness looks like it’s something roughly like intellect which is interest in ideas, but—that’s probably an ability with ideas—but that’s probably measured better by an IQ test, so if I ask you how smart you are and you say you’re pretty smart that would give you a relatively high score on the intellect scale, but if I tested your IQ I will get a better measure than that so in some sense IQ nests inside the big five model. But you can think about it as a separate thing and I think it’s reasonable to do that so, you know, it depends on what you’re up to fundamentally. Now, when the big five was first invented—invented or discovered, depending on how you look at it—as I mentioned briefly, as well, it was brute force statistics basically, so the idea behind the big five is that the—it’s called the lexical hypothesis—and the lexical hypothesis is that, because human traits are so important to us because we want to understand ourselves and, perhaps even more importantly, we want to understand other people, and because we have language, there’s a reasonable probability that we’ve encapsulated the structure of human personality within our language. And so, if you analyze the linguistic representations properly, then perhaps you can extract out the central personality features, and that’s basically what the lexical hypothesis is. And it’s important to know the lexical hypotheses. And it’s a bit more sophisticated than that because it basically presumes that you can extract out relevant information about personality from adjectives—descriptive adjectives—from phrases and from questions, and you’ll get the same basic dimensional structure regardless of which of those techniques you use. And that turns out to be true for all intents and purposes. Now, the lexical hypothesis depends on its validity, depends for its validity on the initial claim that personality is accurately represented within the structure of language. And so one of the things I would say is that there’s a weak big five hypothesis and a strong big five hypothesis, okay? The weak big five hypothesis is that, insofar as you use language to describe personality, personality has a five factor structure that’s reliably extractable. Now the strong big five theory is that, no no, personality has a five factor structure, and it’s accurately represented in language, but when you pull out the structure from language, what you’re pulling out is actually representative of genuine personality. Now, the weak hypothesis, I would say, is established. And it’s worth knowing because what it means is that if you invent a questionnaire that has anything to do with self description, it might be self description at multiple different levels of analysis, like values for example, instead of just adjectives, or attitudes instead of just adjectives, I mean, these categories are sort of unclear. What’s the difference between your attitude and your temperament? Well, it’s usually defined by the sentence that you use the words in, right, you extract out the words, they sort of stand there alone—it’ s very difficult to clarify their meaning. Anyways, the lexical hypothesis I think is one of the most well established—it’s one of the most well-validated claims in psychology. I think it may be the most validated claim, apart from maybe the work that has extracted IQ out from cognitive questions. And basically it was brute force statistics, you know, people developed different lists of adjectives and you can complain in some ways about how they did it, and we’ll talk about that a bit later, but, because they tried to throw out evaluative words like good and evil for example—those aren’t in the big five—so they tried to only use adjectives that didn’t necessarily seem to be, like, valued or devalued. So introvert and extrovert, well, they’re opposites, but is it better to be an introvert? Is it better to be an extravert? Well, it’s not obvious so all the words that cover that dimension can be kept in because there’s no value judgments associated with it and the originators of the big five theory wanted to keep it as free of values as possible. Now that’s already a hypothesis right? It’s a hypothesis that you can come up with an accurate description of human personality even if you eliminate all the words that are clearly valenced. And we did an experiment here a while back that was pretty interesting. We got hold of a data set of descriptive adjectives and we put all the evaluative words back in. So, like nasty and horrible and awkward and cruel, and then the good words as well: moral, pleasant, uplifting, all those things. And then we had people rate people they liked and people they didn’t like using that expanded list and we got a real archetype in some sense of the hateable person and a tremendous number of the words that were used came from the evaluative dimension. So I think that when you throw out the evaluative words you actually throw out a lot of what people actually use, descriptive words to describe, because when you like someone or don’t like someone, if someone’s likeable or unlikeable that’s a pretty important phenomena. I mean, you hang around the people you like generally speaking and you don’t associate with the people you don’t like, so it’s a fundamental choice. But we’ll talk about that later because there’s reasons that happened and the reasons were valid, and it’s not that easy to fix it. And besides that, the standard five factor model has all sorts of utility. But you need to know what its strengths are and its limitations are. Now, hypothetically, what you do to draw out the five factor model was you take, imagine a set of all descriptive adjectives, okay, and then you take a random sample of those descriptive adjectives, so that it’s not biased—you’re not going to use all of them because, you know, if you asked someone to describe themselves on a questionnaire using all the adjectives we have to describe personality they’d be there for like a day. And so that’s not every efficient. And so you want to take a random sample. Maybe you only sample the words that people are most likely to use. So for example if you go online you’ll find that there are word frequency tables. You know, most of your language, about 500 words covers about 80% of what you say. You know, and I don’t remember what the lexicon of the typical person is, I think it’s in the neighbourhood of 3500 words, but that might be wrong, but there’s like 750,000 words in the English language. It’s an omnivorous language, it just pulls words in from all over. And so we hardly use any of those words, and you know, there’s ones that are used extraordinarily infrequently. So what you could do is you could look at the total set of adjectives and then you could pull out, you know, identify the ones that are used,, you know, the thousand most frequently used words and that’d probably cover 95% of the territory, and then you can pick out a random set of 100. Then you could administer it to people, and then you could factor analyze it—you’d administer it to lots of people—then you factor analyze it and you get five relatively clear and stable factors. And the one that comes out first, it’s the dominant factor in some sense, or the easiest measure or maybe the best represented in language or something like that, it’s extraversion versus introversion. And the extraversion is a positive emotion dimension. And it’s associated with enthusiasm and assertiveness. And assertive people will say, they’ll dominate the conversation with language. Or, well basically that’s the way to think about it. Enthusiastic people, they’re up for anything, you know, they’re the ones they’re always smiling and telling jokes and having parties and that sort of thing. And generally extroverts really like to be around people. So they’re happy, they’re gregarious, they’re assertive, they’re enthusiastic, they’re noisy, they blink more than introverts—now why that is I have no idea, but apparently they do [student laughter]. So if you notice someone blinking a lot you can assume that they’re extroverts. If they’re not conscientious , you know there’s this idea of people being impulsive, it’s a very badly defined term so when you hear a psychologist talking about impulsivity the first think you could realize is they don’t know, you don’t know what they’re talking about because probably there’s no such thing as impulsivity. But extraverted people who are not very conscientious tend to--that's one of the things you might think about as associated with impulsivity. There's all sorts of other things though to, so--okay there's a positive emption dimension and that's extraversion and there's a negative emotion dimension and that's neuroticism. And neuroticism seems to break down into something like withdrawal and volatility. And volatile people are touchy. So, you know, they'll react quite a lot if something negative happens. So if you tease them they might get upset or if you start fighting with them in a sort of provocative way instead of sort of calming everything down, they'll just ramp it up. And if there's two of you that're volatile and you're having a conversation and the conversation goes a little bit, you know, into unpleasant territory, you can really get each other going. So, yes? Student: "Is it like, in terms of the hero, like internal states?" Both. Both, yeah. I mean, that's part of the problem with using the word emotion because, you know, is an emotion an internal state or a set of behaviours, and the answer to that is, as far as we can tell it's both. So now, I'm going to start talking about extraversion and neuroticism, and part of the reason for that is because I think the evidence for the relationship between those traits and the way the brain functions is, in some sense, the clearest. Now, you remember the big five were extracted out using statistical procedures, right, so there's no reason to assume necessarily that the traits would bear any straightforward relationship to brain function. Because they weren't derived from analysis of brain function. At least not directly. They were extracted from analysis of linguistic representations of other people's and your own behaviour. But it turns out that there's quite a concordance between certain elements of neuropsychological theory and the positive and negative emotional traits: extraversion and neuroticism. And so what I'm going to do today is, I'm going to talk to you about how positive and negative emotion are instantiated in some sense, neurologically. But I'm going to put that in a broader picture of brain function because, well first of all, why not? And second because a lot of the things I'm going to tell you about the brain today will sort of retroactively shed light on some of the clinical theories we've already talked about. So, which is nice, you know, because, one of the ways you find out if something is true, and this is something we also talked about during the last lecture, is that it manifests itself even when you use different measurement techniques. And so you have statistical derivation, you know, which basically took place, it really started to accelerate I would say, first in the 1960s and then in the 1980s--it made a big comeback in the 1980s. But paralleling that were theories of brain development. And they weren't really--the scientists that were doing the one sort of research weren't really communicating with the scientists that were doing the other kind of research. So they were methodologically separate. They used different techniques as well. They weren't talking back and forth much and they were using different measurement techniques. So if they both come up with the same thing then you think, oh well there's probably something to that because, you know, the sighted people discovered it and the people who could hear discovered it. It's the same kind of idea. So, and you know, this has been worked out in a fair bit of detail over the last 30 years really. And so the papers that you're supposed to read with this, they're difficult papers. I believe you're reading Grey, which is a model of the limbic system and basal ganglia, applications to anxiety and schizophrenia. And I think you have goals and behaviour, that's the Carver&Scheier paper. I put the Swanson paper in as optional. That's cerebral hemisphere regulation and motivated behaviour. That is a tough paper. And so is the Grey paper. And it's partly because these guys, both of them, Grey's paper is a distillation of a very very thick book that's very very difficult. And that's been written twice. It was published first in 1982 and then again in 1999. It's a brilliant book. It's had a tremendous impact on psychology. Grey was one of those people who, he was so damned smart it was just painful. His reference list--I don't know how many papers are in his reference list. Like 2,000. And one of the really weird things about Grey that makes him stand out among scientists is, he actually read all those papers. And more than that, he understood them. And so that's really something. And so Grey's book on anxiety--he did a lot of work on animal behaviour and, I'll tell you, if you want solid psychological information about how the brain works, the people you pay attention to are the people who are studying animal behaviour and animal brains. They know what they're doing. They're so methodologically careful. They're very very reliable. And the human neuropsychologists and the people that use PET scanners and MRIs and all those things, they're way way way behind the animal researchers. Because the animal researchers can just get in there at a lot higher resolution and they can do much more stringent experiments. And they tend to be more methodologically careful and more scientifically-minded. So anyways, the Grey book is a brilliant book. It took me like four months to read that damn book. And I mean I really had to take it apart because he probably poured 30 years of work into it, something like that. He worked a lot in 30 years. You know? He did a lot of experimentation and he read a lot and so he built a model of the brain's function that was based partly on Russian neuropsychology, partly on cybernetic theory, partly on animal behaviour, partly on neuropsychopharmacology, and so that's the study of how drugs affect behaviour and cognition, and then partly from a higher order conceptual perspective. And then he stacked all those things up, one on top of the other, to make sure that the picture was the same at every single level of analysis. It's absolutely brilliant work and it took the social psychologists like--they really started about Grey, although he published his book in 1982--they probably started thinking Grey seriously in about 2005. So it took 23 years for his book to start to make its wide-scale entrance in the more general psychological community. Anyways, and so you're going to read this paper which is a model of the limbic system and basal ganglia. And 30 years were distilled into the book and then that was distilled into this paper. So you know, it's rough going. And then the Swanson paper, he's another guy--same kind of guy--he's a developmental neuroanatomist and if you're really interested in psychology I would really recommend reading those papers because they're hard going, but if you get it, you have this substrata of knowledge underneath you that's really firm. And I really like Swanson's paper--the guy's a genius. And what's so cool about Swanson's paper is that, if you talk to human neuropsychologists you'll find that they're biased toward the cerebral cortex. And they're sort of, I think there's sort of an anthropomorphic pride that goes along with that. It's like, well how are we different from animals. Well, you know, we've got thumbs and that's great--hurray for the thumbs--and we stand upright, but if you look at us neurologically the big difference is that we have this tremendously expanded cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex, and so then people think--well because, you know, because that's one of the things that differentiates us from animals and it's relatively evolutionarily modern, because the human brain really really developed rapidly over the last two million years, that it's like king of the brain in some sense. And it's the place where all the complicated things happen. And that's just not right, because like, breathing--that's complicated. That's why you don't get to control it voluntarily. And keeping your heart going, that's complicated too, and so you don't get to have a decision about that. Your brain has made that automatic. Like millions of years ago because there's just no way you're going to get voluntary control over something that's that vital. You know, so, assuming that newer brain areas do more complex things, in some ways I think that's actually precisely backwards. It's the old brain areas that've been around for, you know, a hundred million years, those things are smart. And that's why they survived for so long and why they're distributed in so many different species. Your brain is somewhat like a lobster's brain--it's a lot like a mouse brain. And it's a lot like a rat brain. And you might think a rat isn't a very good model of a human, because after all, they're rats, but one thing I can tell you is that a rat brain is a way better model of a human brain than your model of human brain is a model of the human brain. You know what I mean? It's like people think of the brain. Well, they have a dopey model. Use a rat as an example, of course it's off in some ways because rats can't talk for example, but there are so many levels of analysis where you might as well be a rat, you know? Technically speaking. The pharmacology for example is very very similar. The function of the neurotransmitters, the basic anatomy of the structures. There's a tremendous amount of overlap. And so you might as well go for the commonalities among brains before you focus in on the differences, because in some sense that way you get the basic architecture right. Now one of the things that's really interesting about Swanson, and he's not a neuropsychologist and he's not really even a psychologist--he's a developmental neuroanatomist. And so, there's lots of ways of chopping up the brain, you know, to look at it, because it's a really complicated thing. It's like saying, well how many ways can you divide up a city to analyze it. Well, there's endless number of ways that you can divide up a city to look at it. It's the same with the brain because it's infinitely subdividable, in some sense, certainly all the way down to the molecular structures. And then even at higher order levels, you know, because it's so complex and it's hierarchically structured you can just divide it up in all sorts of different ways and so, at higher levels of resolution there isn't even that much agreement on how to name the parts. Now, what the developmental neuroanatomists do is that they look at how the brain develops in utero over time. Because it's a developing thing that sort of unfolds like a flower unfolds, you know? And you can track which part of the early brain turns into the later brain and you can get some sense of the--it's like an evolutionary tree you know? If these three parts grew out of this part then you can assume that there's some commonality between them. And that can also help you figure out how to divide up the brain. And so that's one of the things that Swanson does. But the other thing he does that I really like is that, instead of looking at the brain from top down which is what human neuropsychologists tend to do because they concentrate on say language and higher order cognitive functions, which we think of as complex but you think, they're not that damn complex, you know, like a computer can do mathematics so much better than you that there's not even any comparison, you know. And it won't be very long before a lot of the things that we think of as abstract cognition are things that computers are going to be able to do. They just won GO tournament, for example. And the computers are now better--even your PC is better at playing chess than probably anyone in this room. And the really high end computers are better at playing chess than anyone who lives. And so computers are catching up damn fast, but you'll notice that they don't do things like bus tables in restaurants, because it turns out that's really hard. [Student laughter] Well, I mean think about it. It's hard. You're carrying different sized loads all the time. You have to interact socially with people properly. You have to stay the hell out of the way. You have to exactly time when you're going to come to the table. You have to move extraordinarily efficiently, especially as the place gets busy. You know, there's a lot of demands on you to do that job effectively. And you know, we think about it as a low end job but it's not automated. The low end jobs are the ones that are going to be automated first. And it's not obvious that they're going to be the things that we associated with low-end labour. It's just that--well. Now, what Swanson did with the nervous system--I was so happy when I found this paper because--he did exactly with the nervous system what Piaget did with children. He showed how the nervous system builds itself from the bottom up. And so Swanson lays right on top of Piaget--it's lovely. And then the other thing that Swanson does very very nicely is, he elucidates a lot of the Freudian presuppositions. So Freud of course talked about the id, and the id is this, it's sort of like the archaic brain in some sense, you know. It's where all your primal impulses lurk. And you know he called that one thing the id. Well you might say, well is there an id in the brain and the answer is, well, vaguely. Vaguely. The brain does differ in terms of the age of its subcomponents. And as you go deeper into the brain and closer to the spine, the brain areas get phylogenetically older, and the more phylogenetically older areas of the brain, which are underneath the cortex, they have their own little circuits. And there's some commonality between them, and they do govern primal--I think of them as primal sub-personalities. We've talked about that before. It's better than thinking about them as drives or goals or anything like that because not only do they--they're like sets of associated behaviours, but they're not just that. They're also ways of looking at the world and ways of thinking about the world. So, you know, if you're angry, it's not like you're being driven to use your fists. That's not how it works. What happens is that the angry subpersonality comes out and, you know, it does a whole bunch of things. It's got its own state of arousal. It's characterized both by positive and negative emotion, which is something that's quite peculiar about anger, because it's both a defensive action and an aggressive, forward moving behaviour. And it has a viewpoint. Like it's a biased viewpoint. If you're angry with someone, all you can see about them is how damn irritating they are and how much they need to be defeated. You know, roughly speaking. And so it's a whole personality. Now, it's a one dimensional personality because all it's really got is anger, and that's not enough to solve every problem. But you can't think about it as a drive exactly because it's not deterministic. You know, even when you're angry, you have a range of choices to make. Now, they're circumscribed by the fact that you're angry, but it's best to think about it as a sub personality. I think you just get a lot farther that way. Now, what Swanson did--you know how Piaget talked about children/infants, they start out with a few fundamental reflexes, right, that they're sort of born with, including the ability to use their mouth and their tongue as an exploratory device. And then they have certain reflexes that they can manifest right away, and then they have the ability to modify those reflexes. And so, as far as Piaget was concerned, that was enough to get the ball rolling. It was sort of like the child was like booting up across time. It's got some, you know, outside of the operating system you've got some bare processes in your computer that get it started enough so the operating system can turn on. It sort of unfolds up into something complex. Well that's sort of what human beings do across time. They start out with these basic reflexes that are simple movements and then they earn how to modify the movements and then they learn how to chain the movements together and then they learn how to use the chained movements as tools, in some sense, as embodied tools, to allow these biologically determined sub-personalities to operate in the world with some chance of success. Okay, now you can layer that onto the nervous system, so part of what's happening when you get these basic movements down, the ones that are not automatic like your ability to grip and the ability to do this with your hands and all the basic subroutines you have with your body--those are automatized, they're made into little machines, and a lot of them run spinally. You know, because what you think in some sense is that, if you're walking, you're thinking about walking in some way--that's how you walk. And it's like, that's not right. What happens is your orient yourself to a goal, and in some sense you just disinhibit the system that knows how to walk. And then it more or less does it automatically, and you know, you direct it. And you can modify what it's doing if there's an error. But you kind of know that, right? You drive to school or you drive somewhere you're familiar to, you don't even necessarily remember the drive if you've done it 50 times. It's because you're basically--in some sense you're just sequencing automated behaviours. And, a good thing too because, if you didn't have those automated expert behaviours at hand, you wouldn't know how to drive. Because, you're just not smart--the time that you drive most consciously is when you first learn how to drive. Well, you don't want a conscious driver, you want an unconscious expert driver whose consciousness is monitoring the world for anything unexpected. That's what you want. So, and that's the case with almost everything you do. If you have to become conscious of what you're doing, the probability that you don't do it very well is really high. And you know that because maybe you're talking to someone, it happens when I'm lecturing sometimes--if I'm not really on top of things I'll get self-conscious--and that's a terrible thing to have happen when you lecture, you know, it just makes you stumble. If it's going well I know where I'm going and I have all these little routines that're stories and things that I know that--they just automatically sequence. All I have to do is point the lecture in the right direction and, you know, the things that are logically associated with the direction of the lecture will--they'll come up. They're primed in some sense. And so, Swanson helped me understand the functions of the lower part of the brain quite well and then to map that onto Piaget. And one of the things he helped me understand was just exactly how sophisticated the lower parts of the brain are, the more automatic parts. Now, the behaviourists used to believe that, or did believe and still believe to some degree, that a lot of your behaviour is reflexive. And the radical behaviourists, the guys from the 50s, more or less made that case that even complex behaviour among animals is nothing but the chaining together of automatic reflexes. So it was a deterministic chain of reflexes. Well, you do have reflex actions, you know, so if you touch a hot stove you'll jerk your hand away, and your brain isn't involved in that--it's just your spinal cord that's involved in that. Now, your brain is involved when the pain hits, and maybe that's so you stop doing it in the future, but the conscious part of your brain is too slow to get your hand away from the stove in time. And so, what's happening in your body in some sense is that you have these multiple layers of neurological organization and some of them are quite fixed--they're automatic deterministic systems and those are things you've really really practiced and that you can just can run as a routine. And above that are those things that you've chained together, but they can be chained together in different ways so they're less automatized. And then if you keep going up they get more and more complex and less automatized, until at the top, which is where your consciousness is, roughly speaking, you have to program what you're doing, you know. You have to pay very careful attention to how to go about doing this because you don't have the systems built into you. So you know what that's like if you're trying to learn something new, it takes a lot of energy and you really have to pay attention. And then once you start to get it, well, what really happens is there's things you don't have to think about any more. And thank god for that, because first of all, you can't think that much because you're a limited capacity processor, and second, the programming is quite difficult. Okay so  if you look on the right there, there's a little diagram that's a hierarchical--or a little table really and it's talking about the motor system. Now the motor system is what allows you to output action. And you're outputting action at all sorts of levels that you don't even realize because, you know, you might think that sight is a sensory activity, for example, but there's a very tight relationship between sensory activity and motor activity. So, for example, when you're looking at a scene, even though you don't know it, your eyes are going like this. And the reason you're going like that is because if you held your eyes absolutely still, and you can actually learn to do this, if you hold your eyes absolutely still your vision will fade right out and you won't be able to see anything. And it's because the little retinal cells that are picking up the light get exhausted and then so they stop transmitting. And so part of the reason you're zipping your eyes back and forth is so that different parts of your eye can process the scene and it doesn't get exhausted. And plus, you're also looking around and you're looking at when things move, you know, you direct your attention to that, or if someone makes a gesture. And so, you're actually kind of using your eyes like tentacles, you know, to check out the information that's coded in the light. And even when you hear and that sort of thing there's a fair bit of motor activity associated with it--you turn your head unconsciously and there's all sorts of little motor actions in your ear that also help you tune in, and so those things are tightly associated. But roughly speaking, the motor output is action. And then Swanson shows that there are these layers in the nervous system that go from the spinal cord upward. The first ones are the somatomotor neuron pools, and the second are locomotor pattern generators, and the third are locomotor pattern initiators and then the forth are locomotor pattern controllers. It's a hierarchy. And so, the way to kind of lay Piaget on it, in some sense, is to think of the somatomotor neuron pools as simple actions that can be implemented automatically. And then the locomotor pattern generator has taken those simple actions and chained them into relatively more complex melodies of action, so kinetic melodies, and then the locomotor pattern initiator more or less decides when those kenetic melodies should be implemented. And even that can be unconscious. So it's still at that level of brain organization, it's still more or less automatic. Even stimulus-response is a way to think about it. And then you go one level higher and that's when you get the ability to voluntarily use these automated things. So I can show you an example of how this works. This is called a ballistic movement. So, I'm going to take my hand and I'm going to bring it down really fast right toward that edge. Okay so--alright now, so that's very fast movement. Now one of the things that's cool about that movement is that I don't have time, once that action starts, it happens so fast that it's done by the time that the information about that action actually gets to my brain. Once I let that go, I can't control it. What I basically am doing is disinhibiting the motor control systems that I already have established in my psychophysiological being. I'm disinhibiting one of those and then it runs automatically. And so that's what you're doing all the time when you're acting in life. It's kind of a neat--I wrote a paper a while back with an undergraduate student of mine, he was a pretty bright character, and we got invited to do a paper--I got invited to do a paper--on free will, and so we were thinking about free will and, it's very interesting to think about free will in relationship to these hierarchies because it sort of goes like this: it's that, out there in the future, you've got free will. But as the future moves towards the present, you don't. Once it gets close enough to the present you have to have initiated something automatic that will happen. And so I can give you an example. People who play the piano very well, they look ahead of where they're playing in the music. Because they know how to do this, they don't have to think about it. What they have to do is look ahead so that the part of them that knows how to do this gets ready to do it. And all of you are experts in that way likely--all of those of you who drive--you're also experts that way. Because when you're driving, where do you look? If you're a good driver, on the highway, you look at least half a second or a second ahead. Why? Well because 50 feet ahead has already happened. Right, it's too close in time for you to do anything about it, so basically what you're doing is you're looking at the road and then you're disinhibiting sequences of actions--the ones that are going to correspond to what you want to do with the road most adequately. And the closer you get to executing one of those motor behaviours, the more automated it is. SO by the time you manifest the action, there's no free will there at all. But you set it up to be released in some sense. So I can say, well, there's no free will in that, but there was in deciding to do it at that point. So and that's sort of how your automaticity meets your freedom. You've got to think about it as something extending across time. Okay, so having established that then we're going to get into the neurological localization a little bit. So you might say, well you collect all these patterns of behaviour and then you automate them into routines. I can give you an example, so, for a child, you know, when a child is first born, if you tap on its cheek it'll go like this. It's called a rooting reflex, and it'll move its mouth and tongue. Well what it’s doing, roughly speaking, is its searching for a nipple, and if you just put your finger there it'll clamp onto that and start to suck. And so the child comes out with that ability. And that's a reflex, it's sort of built into the neurology. But then when the child starts to interact with the mother to actually breastfeed, well then that initial reflex has to be modified quite substantially in the context of the relationship with the mother because the bare reflex, it's enough to get the thing going but it's not enough to make it work. And so often mothers take a fair bit of time to learn how to breastfeed, but it's also because the baby is taking a fair bit of time to learn how to do it. So they have to establish the dance that goes with that. And one of the things that's quite cool about that dance, so to speak, is there's been studies done of depressed and non-depressed mothers interacting with their infants. And so if you take a non-depressed mother interacting with her infant and you just film them, and you speed up the film, you can see the baby reacts and the mother reacts and the baby reacts and the mother reacts and it's like a dance, you know, there's this continual flow of information between the two of them. And if the baby's with a depressed mother that doesn't happen. It's jerky and discontinuous. And so if you think about that you can see how the dialectical interaction between the mother and child is building up the child's repertoire of complex abilities--within a social context. I know I told you guys before, roughly speaking, that kids really get socialized to play with each other between two and four. But that's not exactly true because even at the lower level, more automated, and more primordial reflex behaviours, like the ones that are associated with breastfeeding, even those develop under the constraints of social guidelines. So society's always there, right from the reflex level up. But you know what happens when kids are between two and four, they have to learn to actually play, they have to learn how to play complex games with other children and so that involves communication and negotiation at a verbal level. And also with people their own age. So you know, it's continuous in some sense and discontinuous in another sense. Okay so anyways, you might say well why do you bother stringing all these things together, and well, you think about the breastfeeding issue. Why does a baby bother to learn how to breastfeed? Well, that's pretty obvious isn't it. I mean, first of all, if it doesn’t then it doesn't live. And there's a bunch of reasons for that--one is obviously it's not going to be nourished properly, although, there are things you can do to substitute for that. Although still, breastfeeding still seems to be the best thing you can do for your baby. Although, you can work around it, but fundamentally it seems to be the best thing you can do. But then the baby's also learning all sorts of other things, like it's got skin-to-skin contact and it's snuggling and it being comforted and doing eye gaze to eye gaze and it's cooing and the mother's imitating it and there's just a lot of things going on there. And so the child is organizing all that, partly to fulfill a basic biological need, which is two needs, both thirst and hunger, but it’s also fulfilling its need for play, for example, because children have a circuit for play. So you could say play is part of the id--it's a fundamental biological need. And Jaak Panksepp was one of the people either discovered that or worked on it, and that word was extended by Tiffany Fields in a hospital in Florida--some really brilliant work. She was looking at Panksepp's work on the necessity of tactile stimulation and she thought, hey I bet we could try that with premature babies. Because if a baby's premature, a couple of things are problems. I mean, first of all, at the need of the term, pregnancy term, that's when babies lay on fat. You know, so they come out and they've got some storage there in case things don't get going very well. And they're gaining a lot of weight in that last period of pregnancy, so if they come out premature then they're really skinny. And then what happens often is they start to lose weight and that's not good because they should be ramping up the weight gain really quickly. A newborn baby will outgrow its clothes in one week, you know, they're gaining weight quickly. The premature babies lose weight, and it's hard to keep them going. They put them in an incubator, they feed them, but what Tiffany Field did was, she had the nurses go in there with gloves and massage the babies for three minutes ten times a day. And those babies gained weight as fast as babies that were still in utero and you could still detect the differences in their development six weeks later. Which in baby terms is like forever, right. I mean you change as much from zero months to six months as you probably do from six months to 20 years old. It's such a radical transformation. Okay, the reason I'm telling you all this is because, you lay out these hierarchies of behaviour that are well practiced and automatized and brought under the control of social conditioning, but you really do them in the service of--well that's the question. In the service of, we'll say, biological necessity, for the sake of argument. Well you have to eat and you have to drink, and so one of the reasons you lay out the hierarchy that's associated with breastfeeding is so that you can do that directly, but also so that you can establish a relationship so that not only are you doing it directly this day, but you're also going to do it tomorrow and the next day and the day after that. And so the hunger system is integrated with these other systems of biological constraint in some sense, and they're trying to come up with an answer to the continual problem. So you have dedicated biological systems that help you address problems that are associated problems that are associated with your biological nature that are universal. And those would be the things that Freud would describe as the id. So you can think of these hierarchies of motor behaviour, which sort of develop up into sub personalities, as nested in some sense inside of motivational states. So there's the motorbehavious hierarchy that you use when you're angry, there's the motorbehaviour hierarchy you use when you're distressed--and kids get very good at that, you know, so they'll cry, which is a reflex, but by the time they're about two, they're pretty damn good at crying. You know, they've got a cry that sounds like they're sad and upset when they're really angry. And so if you really listen you can hear the difference. Because an angry baby sounds different than a sad baby. But if you don't listen, the baby will have you thinking it's sad no problem. Then you'll feel sorry for it and go help it out, and really it's just thinking "up yours" [Student laughter]. So we know this partly because--so let's say you've got a baby and it's under nine months, six months old, and it's crying in its crib. You think, well what should you do? You go in there and you pick up the baby and you comfort it and you probably do that pretty much non-stop when the baby's that young because they're so young they should really still be in utero--they're very young. But by nine months that baby's starting to get smart. And so it's about nine months when it can visually recognize people it knows and people he/she doesn’t know. And then, so the baby's in there and it's squawking a bit and so, it wants some attention, and then someone walks in and it's not the mother. And the baby bursts into tears and people think the baby's all sad because its mother didn't show up. It's not sad, it's really irritated that the wrong person showed up. And you can tell that because people have done facial coding of the baby's expression and also its skin tone and an angry baby looks angry. First of all it turns all red, it's really angry. And you see that behaviour later too in temper tantrums. Like a two year old that's having a temper tantrum is just having a fit of rage. The rage system, because there is a rage system, is just completely out of control, it's just absolutely dominating their behaviour. You don't really want to encourage that because the rage system should start to be modulated by other systems and other higher order control systems. Not so much suppressed or repressed which is sort of how the Freudians would think , but integrated into more complex and sophisticated modes of action, so the child can use its anger--which is an extraordinarily useful capacity, because it allows you to defend yourself--so the child can learn to use that in a sophisticated way so it can solve the problems that would lead to a rage attack without ever getting to the point where it has to be enraged. That's a functional child--it's not like it's learned to repress its anger, it's just that it gets along with people and never has to get angry. So, now some kids learn to repress their anger because they're in a household where any manifestation of anger is dealt with very very harshly. And maybe there's a rule that everyone has to be nice to each other all the time, or else. Sort of a paradoxical rule. But anyways, you can imagine there's a lot of these biological systems and so I want to show you some of their instantiation here, so let's look at this one. When you get up above the spinal cord, there's a little brain area, I'll show you about how big it is. There it is. So there's your brain, the top-on part, the part on top, that's the cerebral cortex. That's the part that people are really proud of. It's like, oh wow, look at our cerebral cortex. Doesn't it have a lot of neurons [student laughter]. Then, in the middle there, there are older brain area--phylogenetically old--and then as you go down toward the spinal cord they basically get older and older and older and older. And more and more critical to your development. So the serotonin system, we talked about it a little bit in lobsters, right. The serotonin system determines where a lobster is in a dominance hierarchy, it determines whether it stands like this or whether it stands like this. That's an old system. And when your brain is developing in utero it's the serotonin system that guides its development. So that's how important it is, sort of like the conductor of the orchestra, but it's also the thing that controls the entire unfolding of the brain. And it's a really really archaic system, so in some sense your being is controlled by these things that are ancient, beyond comprehension. Anyways, you look at the hypothalamus and you think, well that's not very big. And yeah, it's not. But, if you take a cat and you--so a cat brain looks something like that--if you take off all the stuff that's in light orange and most of the top of the stuff that's above the hypothalamus that's in white--you just take all that out, and it's a female cat and it's in a cage--you really can't tell the difference between it and a cat that has all the rest of that brain. Now there's some things it can't do. It doesn't do very well if you take it into a new situation because it can't learn. More importantly in some sense, it can't remember. So it's in a perpetual sense of everything happening for the very first time. But it's still capable of a lot of the reactions that would be necessary for you to stay alive. SO it can regulate its liquid intake, it can regulate its food intake, it can react sexually, it's capable of defensive aggression, although it'll really fly into a rage so it's kind of like a disinhibited two year old in some sense. And as long as you keep it in the cage and provide it with food and water it's like the way it lives. And it's hyper exploratory which I think is just weird beyond belief. You know, you take the brain off a cat and then all it wants to do is explore. Which is not what you think at all. It's like, a cat with no brain is really curious--it just doesn't make sense. But it does actually because the systems that drive your exploratory urge are rooted in that hypothalamus and they're actually the same systems--it's individual differences in the functions and sensitivity of those systems that are in part associated with individual differences in extraversion. So extroverts are sort of hyper exploratory in social situations. Whereas introverts aren't. And the exploratory circuit that has its origins in the hypothalamus runs on dopamine, roughly speaking, and then it runs through the base of your brain and then up into your prefrontal cortex in particular. And it's also the system that responds to cocaine and amphetamines and other drugs that people like to take because they heighten positive emotion. So it's variability at a very very low level in the brain that determines things like the differences in extraverts and introverts. Anyways, it's this tiny little part of the brain and if that's all you have you can get along not too bad. But that's also because it's tiny from one level of analysis, but it's really big from another. I mean, you can increase your resolution when you're doing brain analysis all the way down to the molecular level and still be looking at the brain, you know. Below the molecular level, at the atomic level, well everything's made out of atoms. But the brain is already there at a molecular level and it's insanely complicated at a molecular level, and the hypothalamus is way bigger than a molecule. And so even though it's small compared to the rest of our brain it's still a whopping big structure by atomic standards and so there's a hell of a lot going on down there. And you notice the hypothalamus, you might say, is there such a thing as the id. Well, yes and no. Is it in the brain? Yes and no. A really low resolution representation of what's in the brain, that's one way of thinking about it. But then you might say, is there a hypothalamus? And the answer to that is, well, yes and no. Because there's the hypothalamic structure, and you see it's made out of a bunch of things that are different. And so you could say, well should you even group those things together. And the answer to that is, it depends on why you're grouping them together. If it's useful for some purpose of understanding or control, to group them together--they're similar in the way that they emerge in the course of brain development, and they're roughly of the same phylogenetic age--but there's lots of reasons to treat them as the same and there's lots of reasons to treat them as different. It depends on what you're trying to do. Anyways, the hypothalamus has all these little sub-structures that are really in some sense at the core of the sub-personalities that we talked about. So, for example--okay so this is Swanson again and he's showing you--this is a rat's brain from the bottom--and he's showing you the layout of the hypothalamus. You see it's got all those different nuclei. It doesn't look like one thing, it looks like a bunch of things. And so here he says, the descending paraventricular nucleus is involved in the control of eating and drinking, and that's shown in green. So that's the thing that--when you get hungry or thirsty--that's the thing that sort of turns on your hungry and thirsty sub-personality. And then the rest of the cell groups play a major role in controlling two classes of social behaviour, that is, behaviours involving interactions between animals: reproductive--that's the red areas--and defensive--the purplish areas. So now what you can think is, you have all those little subroutines that we talked about, that're sort of at hand and ready to go, and then they're organized underneath these major classes of motivation so that, you have to do something--like eat--and so it's like there's an eating robot in you, that's one way of thinking about it, except it's smarter than that and it's alive and conscious. These things are alive, they're not machines and they're not deterministic. You can think of them as low-resolution personalities, or uni-dimensional personalities because the only thing the eating system really cares about is whether or not you eat. And the drinking system is the same thing. You know, you see malfunctions sometimes in people of these singular systems, so you can develop a condition if you have hypothalamic damage where you'll drink water til you die and no one can stop you. They can lock you in a room away from sinks and that would stop you, but you'd be raging away inside trying to claw through the door to get to the damn water because you're so hyper-thirsty that it's all that there is left of you in some sense and if you're allowed access to a tap, you'll just drink and drink and drink and drink and drink until you drown. And, you know, people can say, hey you've had enough water--it's like, forget that. The hypothalamus is a major league system, and when push comes to shove, it's the thing that's in control. And one of the ways of thinking about the way that you organize your life is that, the hypothalamus controls the major motivation systems--we just talked about those--and so those are the things that people would think about as drives. Although they're not drives, they're too complicated to be drives. And then there's other systems that come up later that we'll also talk about that govern emotion, like anxiety and a different system that governs pain. Partly what you're trying to do as your organize your life is to make sure those systems stay shut off. And then you think, well I'm in control. Well no, you're not. You just satisfied all the things that could take control from you, and so now you have a modicum of choice. And basically what you're doing when all these things have had what they need is you're running around exploring. You know, and that's also another one of these circuits because the hypothalamus, as I already said, governs exploration. So, a lot of--see, psychologists often get things backwards and they ask silly questions like why are people anxious. That's a stupid question. It's why are people ever calm--that's a question. Why are you anxious? Well, hmm, think of all the terrible things that can happen to you. And they will happen to you, even worse, and there isn't anything you can do about it. It's like why aren't you quaking in your boots just sitting there. Well, that's a mystery. You know, and then, here you are in your normal state--it's like, well no, this is not a normal state. People have been trying for seven million years, as people, to create a situation so complex and comfortable that a couple hundred of you can sit here without having your hypothalamus driving you toward something and actually just listen to something for a few hours. That's not normal. That's so staggeringly abnormal that it's a miracle. The typical person--and for most of human history--it's like, you are hungry, man. And that's not the same. Like you people--well some of you have probably been hungry in your life, but--is there someone here who's gone without food for more than one day? Okay has anybody here gone without food for more than a week. Okay, how about three days? Okay, so like, are you hungry? No. You're hungry when you haven't had anything to eat for twenty days, then you're hungry. And the same goes for thirst and cold and all the things we're just never exposed to. So we think civilized people are all calm and nice and easy to get along with, it's like, yeah well you have absolutely everything you need all the time and that makes you as easy to get along with as any completely insane primate ever gets. Okay, so you might say, well god, if you can survive with just the hypothalamus, what good is the rest of the brain? And the answer is, well, if you're thirsty--let's say you're angry, the hunger system isn't going to be able to take care of that, right. So you're hungry, okay, that works. You're angry, that works. But then you have another problem, which is you're hungry now and you're angry now, perhaps, you can move through those states. If you watch that, you'll see that in two year olds--it's part of why they're so fun to be around. First of all, they're really excited and they're running around playing and then they trip and they're crying like made and then you poke them and they laugh and then they want something to eat and then they fall asleep [student laughter]. You know, they're just run by their hypothalamus and it's really fun to see because they're so alive and so enthusiastic and spontaneous, but they're completely clueless. It's like, you take one of those creatures to the mall and leave it there and it's just not happy at all. And the reason for that is, well it doesn't know how to sequence any of its actions, right. It runs through these states of need, but it isn't complicated enough to figure out how to address those needs in any consistent sense across multiple environments in a social world. You need the rest of your brain for that. And that again fits in with the Piagetian idea--is that what you're doing is you're taking these micropersonalities that are basically instantiated within the hypothalamus and then you're organizing those into more and more complex games. And you need the cortex to do that because the cortex is partly what enables you to think about time. You know, because the hypothalamus, it's a here and now thing. The hypothalamic cat lives in the present--there's the present, and that's it. You can probably get some sense of that--like one of the things that happens to people if they take amphetamines or if they take psychedelic drugs is that some of the inhibitory control, some of the more complex control systems that are cortical, shut down. And so then they enter a state where it's all now and you know, the now just comes at people in that state. It's a transcendent experience, but of course, despite that, you're not functional. And so in some sense you trade that transcendent relationship with reality for a narrow functionality. And that's too bad and that's life, but it's a tradeoff. So anyways you're organizing these sub-personalities and you're using your cortex to do that because you don't just have to think about eating, you have to think about, how am I going to get the food? When is the food going to come? How am I going to cook the food? What about all the other people that want to eat? How do we regulate that in our family? And then how do we regulate that with the fact that we also need to sleep and we need to work and we need to get along with other people and we need to have something interesting to do and--it's ridiculously complicated. And there's no end to the complication because, maybe you're just solving the problem for you, and then you're two. Or maybe you're trying to work it out within your family. Well then that's sort of like the Crumb brothers, they never get out of their family because they never come to an arrangement that works well enough so that they can, in some sense move into the broader world. Then you solve the family problem but then you've got the tribe problem and, maybe you can solve that to some degree, but then you have the broader political problem and it's like--there's an infinite problems that crop up for you to solve so there's plenty for you to do with your big cortex. And you know we paid a big price for that thing because once we discovered time, we can make a bargain with the future, which is basically what you do when you regulate your behaviour, right. You're making a bargain with the future. You say to yourself, if I forego so and so now then, later, it'll pay off. And that's real useful. You can conceptualize the future, and you can conceptualize the future as something you can bargain with. But there's a lot of cost to that. One is you don't get to do just what you want right now, and of course that sucks--it's partly why people drink alcohol. Because alcohol is disinhibiting, it stops you from--it actually doesn't stop you from thinking about the future--it stops you from caring about what you think about the future. And that's just as good. And so then you can go out and have fun because fun is impulsive and often extremely dangerous, because the long term consequences can be really devastating. But it's a real pain to keep yourself controlled all the time because you're foregoing direct reward constantly. I think it's part of the reason why people in heavily industrialized complex countries aren't necessarily happy. You know, it takes a lot of grinding away to keep all the machinery that keeps all of this in place going. So you're not getting typhoid and tigers aren't tearing you apart, but by the same token, you have to be unbelievably disciplined and ready to act constantly to keep everything that's so complex around you working. And that's not necessarily fun. Okay, now, let’s look at something else. Now you can tell me if I showed you this--I hope I didn't show you this. You see that? Okay, good. Now some of you know this, and so you just don't say anything. Although you probably don't know this specific version. So if you've seen this sort of thing before you're going to think you're smart while you're watching it, but it'll probably still trip you up--I hope. Give me a sec here and we'll see if we can actually get some sound out of this thing. Yeah, so that's quite the illustration. So one of the questions you might ask is, well okay first of all, how many of you didn't see the gorilla? Okay, how many of you have seen this sort of video before? Okay so you knew about the damn gorilla [student laughter]. Of the people who didn't know about the gorilla, how many people didn't see the gorilla. Well, some. Okay, fine. How many of you got the other things? Both of them? Okay, well so you get the point. The point is--and it's a brilliant experiment, it's an insanely brilliant experiment--that you're blind to a ridiculous degree. And your visual system and your brain are constantly coping with the fact that you're blind. And you can kind of detect it to some degree if you look at someone, but you pay attention to the things that surround them, you'll see that--so, I'm looking at you. I can't see your nose for sure, it's gone. I can’t even see your face. I can see your glasses. I can't see any features in your face at all. Can you smile? No, the one behind. Well one of the things I've noticed when doing this is that if you look here--look at my finger--but pay attention to my face, it's really hard. Because normally when you pay attention you move your eyes to what you're paying attention to. Okay so here's what you might see--the first thing you might see is that you can't see my nose [student laughter]. The second thing you might see is that you can really see my eyes, especially if they move [uproar of student laughter]. Weird eh? Isn't that weird? God, it's so weird. It's like all of a sudden these eyes pop up and they're going back and forth like this. Yeah, so we'll try this too. So look at my finger again. You can also see teeth. Well, why? Well, if you're looking here and there's something there with eyes and teeth, you should probably be able to see it right? So what that basically means is that you've got this tiny little fovea, which is right in the centre of your retina, it's just densely packed with cells and then those cells transmit information along the optic nerve, and they're just connected like mad to cells in the visual cortex. But you don't have that much room, so you can't connect all the cells in your retina to like 10,000 cells at the first level of connection. You'd have to have a brain this big you know, and you don't. So you get by, and part of the way you get by is you're always moving your eyes around. And so it looks like you can see everything, but you can't. In fact, out here, like if I'm looking at you--now I can tell my hands are there, although if I didn't know they were hands I probably couldn't figure it out--they're kinda blurry I would say. And they're in black and white, but I can't tell that. So out here, who cares what colour it is. So you just don't see the colour. But you don't know that you don't see the colour. Now of course, I can have my hands here, and then I put them here--I can hardly see them--and then oop, they're gone. They're so gone it's like they don't even exist. It's not even--because you'd think in some sense that what is behind your head would be black, like when you close your eyes, that's nothing. But no no, what you can't see behind your head is so not there that it's literally--it isn't even not there, that's how gone it is. Okay, so part of the way your eyes work is that the periphery is attached to devices, in some sense, and some of them detect lines and some of them detect movement. You remember Jurassic Park? "Don't move. The dinosaur can't see you unless you move." It's like, yeah, frogs are like that. And cats are like that to some degree. They can really see things move this way. Partly because their eyes are slitted, makes it easier for them to see things moving like this. They're not so good at things moving like this. Well, it's because they chase mice, right. Mice will--most mice, except ones that hop [student laughter]--they move this way, and so cats are specialized for that. And so you're also specialized to see teeth and eyes because you want to know if something's looking at you, and you want to know if it has teeth. And so what that means in part is that the surrounding tissue in your eyes reports to some degree to your visual cortex, which is what you use to actually have conscious vision with, but a lot of it just dumps down into some of the brain areas we haven't talked about. Not necessarily directly down to the hypothalamus, although I suspect it has inputs there, I just don't know. But your eyes talk to your spinal cord directly, so that you can see something snake-like, for example, and jump. Just like you jump if your hand touches a hot stove. You don't even see the snake, it's like snake-jump. And the reason for that is if you wait around to see the snake, it's like it's bitten you 15 times and you're dead. So you can't wait around and see this, like "oh look. A snake." And then you jump. It's like, no. That doesn't work. Your body has conserved all these layers of reflex and movement, all the way up to higher order voluntary movement, because otherwise you just wouldn't be fast enough when something super fast happens. And then, the way your eyes are built, your eyes can tell your body to jump. It's no vision, right. It's just pattern. Snake-pattern, jump-pattern. Snake-pattern, retinal-pattern, optic-nerve pattern, brain-pattern, muscle-pattern. No vision. No seeing. Because you don't need the seeing. You just have to do pattern matching. It's a weird way of thinking about it, but it's not much different than touching, you know. You can feel the pattern, you can build a three-dimensional representation of it, you can really see well with your eyes--it's like the idea that blind people can't see is a really dopey idea. They can't see colour. And they're not very good at detecting things in the distance. But they have a visual world, it's just built out of things that don't have colour. You know perfectly well that that's the case because I can hand you an object and you could fiddle around with it behind your back and after some fiddling around you'd know exactly what it looked like. And you know you might pull it out here and say , well I didn't know it was blue. It's like, yeah okay, you didn't know it was blue, but you still saw it. And you get pretty god-damn good vision with your ears. So there are kids who're blind who've learned to echolocate. So they go click-click-click, they don't make that noise exactly, but they do click [clicking sounds] and they can detect the clicks bouncing off of things. And they can do that well enough, not only to walk, but some of them can actually ride bikes. It's like, hey that's impressive, man. Yeah, there's one kid--I saw a kid on youtube who's blind who could shoot baskets, yeah, which is--that's impressive, man. But my point is that a lot of the neural tissue is--it'll take whatever input it gets. So if you're born blind, your auditory systems will invade your visual system. And then you have twice as much brain devoted to your hearing. So, and then you know, you can use that quite effectively. So I think we're probably pretty much out of time. One thing I want to tell you before we go on to the next part though is that--so now we've sort of built up the idea of these underlying motivational systems. And now you can kind of see how they work, so you might say to yourself, why didn't you see the gorilla and the curtain and the person leaving. It's really complicated, it's really complicated. Well, the first answer is, you did what I asked. And then you might ask, well why? Why did you do what I asked? I mean you missed the damn gorilla, right. It's like, obviously that wasn't a very good decision. So you think, well why did you do what I asked? And the answer would be--well, it's sort of like the Milgram obedience experiment except at a way lower level. It's like, we've got an agreement going on here. You guys are all very sophisticated and complex game players, otherwise you couldn't sit here peacefully for an hour and a half. So you're very well socialized, all of you. And so that means you've organized all your motivations into a hierarchy, and that hierarchy is guiding your behaviour here. It might be something like, well we need to learn something and hypothetically, you come here and you learn something. And so you're playing that out. And because that's the motivational state that you're in, when I ask you to do something, you're just going to do it. Well then, what's so cool is that as soon as you decide to point your attention at something, what you see in the world radically transforms. So I say, well count the basketballs and all of a sudden all you can see are basketballs. And you think, no no, I see--I'm not blind. It's like well, you're pretty damn blind. And so, that's partly how you can understand how motivation is a sub-personality. Like it has its whole sets of perceptions and values. It's like, all of a sudden, I set you up in a little motivated state--it was a complicated one--but it was just like, here's a task. And so you're all motivated, you're going to do the task properly, for god only knows how many reasons, and then all of a sudden, all that exists in the world are basketballs. And so, it's as if your goal-directed attention has transformed the phenomenology of the world. And that's something that's really cool because one of the things it implies is that what you see of the world depends on what you're aiming at. And in a real sense--this isn't some trivial sense. It means like literally what you're aiming at--I'm going to count the basketballs--it means, well you're not noticing the gorillas. So one of the things that you might ask yourself, and this is partly what the phenomenologists were on about is, what're you aiming at? And what is it that what you're aiming at allows you to see, and what is it that what you're aiming at blinds you to. And it blinds you to a lot more than it allows you to see. And so another thing that you can think about is like, if everything you see makes you angry and bitter and resentful, you might think, well hmm, what exactly am I aiming at that's making the world organize itself around me in that manner? And that would be a complex, for a Jungian perspective. A complex would do that. So it's a set of values, they're sort of economist, they inhabit you, it's a sub-personality, it's quite complex, it's got something it's aiming at. You might not even know what that is because you're acting it out instead of understanding it. And because you're inside of it, it lays the world out for you in a particular way that makes the world look like it's showing you that what you think is right. But if you're--what do they say-- to the man with a hammer, everything looks like a nail. And that's one of the things that's so damn cool about that experiment. It's like, really? I'm really that blind? I can miss something that radical just when I'm involved in some dopey task like counting basketballs it makes me so blind that it's almost beyond comprehension. Well, so in some ways you skip between different states of blindness. A lot of them are biologically motivated. And you turn those into a hierarchy and that's sort of your higher value system and then that thing points you at something, and the whole world lays itself out around that. And the way it does it is divides the world into irrelevant things--and so those would've been the curtains in this particular example, or the gorilla or even the player in black who left the game--irrelevant, because it didn't interfere with you counting. So what you look at makes most of the world irrelevant. It makes some things , things that serve you. And that makes you feel positive emotion. And it makes other things things that get in your way. And that's what makes negative emotions. And so you've got the hypothalamic systems that point you in biological directions. You organize those, and then, as you're approaching the things you're aiming at, the positive emotion systems tell you you're on track and the negative emotion systems tell you when something's interfering. And those are actually different neurological systems. So they're not in the hypothalamus. The positive emotion system is in some degree. But the negative emotion system, that evolved later. And there's a couple of them. There's one that produces pain, we'll talk about it more. And there's another one that produces anxiety. And so, now you kind of understand--roughly--the relationship between motivation, perception, and emotion. They all act together. And they're all dependent in this weird way on what you're after. So you can think for 50 years and you won't get to the bottom of it. You know the Buddhists say that everything is illusion. Maya, right, people live in illusion. Because what you're aiming at determines what you see.
The last time we talked, I started to walk you through the nervous system a little bit and we started with the monkey business illusion, and one of the things that's really remarkable about the monkey business illusion is that--and change blindness illusions in general--is that demonstrate to you just to what degree you could either describe yourself as blind or focused. And I think focused is actually better than blind. You know, a laser beam doesn't cover much area, but it really illuminates what it strikes. And people are sort of like that, we're really beamed into a single point and there's something metaphysically spectacular about that, I think, because that single point that we're narrowed down to is in some sense the thing that writes the world, you know, because as we interact with the world we're able to turn it one way or another in all sorts of complicated ways. And, I mean, I know our powers of doing so are obviously constrained to a substantial degree, but by the same token, that focal point of concentration enables us to interact with the world and then, at least seemingly, to change it according to our will. It's like we take a future that's potential, we interact with it at a focal point, and then it transforms itself into a past that's in some sense fixed and real. So that's pretty strange. So I guess you don't want to underestimate the utility of a point. I want to talk to you a little bit first more about what you're blind to and then what the consequences of that are. So, this here is a little diagram of a computer, believe it or not--a conceptual diagram of a computer--and it's predicated on... I'll tell you a quick story. If I've told you this story please stop me, but I don't think I've told you guys this story. So one day back in about 1987 I was working on my computer and I was typing some long essay in DOS and, you really had to back up in those days because the programs didn't do any back up for you and so if the program shut off and you hadn't been super careful you were just going to lose all of it. And so that's what happened--I was typing when the computer went off and so, I had an emotional reaction to that. Right, now an emotional reaction to that is kind of an interesting event because, I would say that you're not even working with the computer until it quits. And the reason I would say that is because, if you think about it, when the computer is functioning the fact that it's an extraordinarily complicated device is basically irrelevant to you. What you're working with, roughly speaking, is the screen, but not really, not even the screen. You're working with maybe a phrase or even the word that's presented on the screen. You know, you're typing the word/phrase/sentence/paragraph/essay, and only out past that domain of consideration do you start thinking about the hardware technology that underlies what you're doing. You don't want to think about that at all. When something's working, you don't have to see it. And so that gives you a clue as to consciousness. Consciousness is an error detecting and correcting phenomena, and you're not conscious of things that are going well. You know, which might explain to some degree why a lot of our life seems to be made up of suffering. If things are going well, it isn't exactly like you're happy if things are going well, you just don't notice when they're going well. Sometimes if they unexpectedly go well, then that makes you happy. But otherwise it's just the same old thing, even if it's amazing. I was--yesterday--I was eating breakfast with my son and I was complaining about the fact that I had to eat canned-smoked tuna because I don't really like fish, but I have to eat fish for a variety of different reasons. And I thought, Jesus, what're you complaining about? I mean, really, do you know what a tuna is like? Those things are like small whales, right; they weigh like 600 pounds, they're impossible to catch. So there's some poor characters out there hauling in tuna, which is impossible--and then they have to clean them and freeze them and smoke them and can them--and all I have to do is go to the store and pick up this can of tuna and then I can complain about it for breakfast. It's really quite staggering, the fact that I can ever eat tuna is a complete bloody miracle. But it's not the sort of thing that makes me happy because I just expect that. Which is very pathetic, but that's how it goes. So anyways, back to the computer. So, it stops working--well, and that's what I would say I notice the computer. And there's nothing more annoying then noticing a computer when you're in the middle of writing an essay because, what the hell do you know about computers? Nothing. What're you going to do? Turn it on and off? Well that's like problem solving process number 1. It usually works--thank god--but if it doesn't work you're into either the software or the hardware. So anyways, I turned it on and off and that didn't work, and so then I turned on a light to see if I could see if something had happened at the back of it. But the light didn't go on so I thought, aha, the power probably went out or I blew a fuse, so I went out to see if the fuse was burnt out, but it wasn't. And then I noticed that all the power in the house was off, and then I noticed that--I went outside to go to the corner store to get something, I don't remember what, and when I went outside I noticed that all the streetlights were off. And then the entire power grid in Montreal was out. And then the entire power grid for like half of Quebec was out. And a big chunk of Eastern North America. And do you know why? Have I told you this story? Good. Because there was a solar flare. And so the sun is a big hydrogen bomb, right. So I don't know if you guys know this--a cheerful piece of information for you if you need to be cheered up--but if you happened to have a hydrogen bomb and you exploded it--you know a hydrogen bomb has an atom bomb for its trigger, did you guys know that? You need to know that because it's important. Because an atom bomb is a big thing, but it's just a trigger for a hydrogen bomb, so a hydrogen bomb is unimaginably bigger than an atom bomb. Anyways, if you blew a hydrogen bomb in the atmosphere over Central North America, you could probably wipe out maybe all of the electronic equipment in the entire continent permanently. Because what happens is when a hydrogen bomb goes off, there's an electromagnetic burst, and as the propagates it'll hit your electronic equipment and propagate across the wires and produce a big spike in current, voltage I think, and it'll just blow it. So your cars won't work, your tractors won't work, your subways won't work, your cars won't work, your computers won't work, your satellites won't work. It's like, done. And also, just to cheer you up even more, back in the late 1800s, I think it was the 1860s, there was this--oh let's go back to the sun. So the sun's a big hydrogen bomb and now and then it freaks out and emits a big solar flare, which is something that's gone wrong on the sun. And maybe it blows out this solar flare almost to the orbit of mercury, and then that burst of radiation comes zooming towards earth and then 9 minutes later it hits and, if it's a decent electromagnetic pulse it'll wipe out the power grid in Quebec. And that's what happened. So the reason my computer didn't work is because the sun was misbehaving. And so, I like that. It was very illuminating to me because it just shows you how many things need to be stacked on top of each other, working perfectly for some thing that you're doing to actually function. So anyways, back in the late 1800s in the 1860s, there was a massive solar flare and it produced a bust of power on telegraph lines and it lit some telegraph operators on fire. And so this does happen--it happens about once a century, and we just missed one last year. So while you're worrying about global warming you can be considering the much higher probability that a solar flare will knock out all of our electronics and send us back to like 1860. So the point is that, first of all, there's a lot of things going on to make up an object that you don't detect with your vision. You never think that the reason the computer works is because the sun is acting properly. But it is of course the case that endless number of things have to be stabilized that you don't see. And you might say, well the sun isn't part of the computer but well, that's wrong. It's not part of the computer in some sense when it's behaving, but as soon as it stops behaving it's instantly part of the computer. So here we've got--you might say, well let's say the power hadn't gone out and the computer stopped working. Well then you might think, well I'll never buy that brand again. And maybe the brand is associated with operation in some country where corruption is rife and things are made improperly and the parts don't work very well. So you might think, well I made a stupid purchase decision. And of course that's connected to the political system of that place and the economy. And then weird little things can happen down at the micro level as well as the macro level. So computer chips have now got so small--you know they have little wires in them right, the chips--the wires are now so small that because of quantum uncertainty. So quantum uncertainty basically tells you that you can't really tell where an electron is if you want to know how fast it's going. And you can't tell how fast it's going if you want to know where it is. But more than that it says you can't really know where the thing is, and so what that means is that once you get your wire short enough, some of the electrons might not be in the wires where they're supposed to be, and they actually cause short circuits. So that's another issue. There's other levels of reality that are micro levels that you can't detect at all. So there's macro levels that are way beyond you, you know, political systems, economic systems, biological systems, physical systems outside of that. And then there are these Microsystems layered all the way down, and things can go wrong at any one of those levels and a lot of that is invisible to us. The same thing happens when something goes wrong with you. It's like, what's wrong with you? Maybe you're malfunctioning at the molecular level. Your DNA isn't working properly so you get cancer. Or maybe some virus which is even smaller than the DNA comes in and takes up residence and that's really not so good. Or maybe you're eating something wrong and you have an organ malfunction. Or maybe your family's screwed up and you're stressed half to death and the reason they're screwed up is because you live in, let's say a society that's not friendly to your particular immigrant type, and so the real reason that you're sick is because of people's inability to get along with one another. And so on and so forth and so on. And so god only knows where you're supposed to focus. But, focus we do. And one of the things that motivation allows you to do is to figure out what you're going to focus on. Now you think, god, there's all these things to focus on. There's an infinite number of things to focus on. How in the world do you ever figure out how to focus on anything? Well the answer to that is evolution, fundamentally. You can view evolution in the following way. You can kind of think about the background of reality--I think the best way to think about it is as this interplay of patterns, complex patterns sort of like music. And those patterns are always changing in a sort of dynamic way, and they exist at multiple levels, just like complex music does. So then imagine that what you're trying to do is to dance to the music, to align yourself to the music. And it keeps changing on you so, well, what do you do? Well if you can change then you can change the music. But if you can't change then that's it. You're not dancing anymore. Okay, so let's assume that there's two ways of solving that problem. One way is just sheer number. You're a single celled organism or a mosquito and you don't have that much neurocapacity for transformation and so you don't know what the melody is going to be when you lay your eggs if you're a mosquito and so you produce like a million eggs and some of them can dance to the current beat and the others can't, and so they all die. And so that's what happens over the course of evolution for a very very long time. The melody keeps changing and then what creatures do is propagate a whole variety of variants of themselves, and in the case of small animals or fish even or crayfish or that sort of thing, they just overproduce offspring like mad in hope that one of them can dance to the current tune. And then you know, we get three and a half billion years later, roughly speaking, here we all are and what we've got is this dynamic nervous system. And it enables us to take an external pattern and map it to a neurological pattern, or multiple neurological patterns--because we can interpret things, right--and then to output that to multiple behavioural patterns. And so in some sense, what we've done is we're internalised the process of evolutionary variation into ourselves. And the more complex, roughly speaking, the more layers your nervous system has--imagine there's a pattern on your skin, and then that's interpreted by a pattern of nerves, and then those nerves have an output, they're sensory nerves we'll say, and then those have an output to motor nerves, and then those have an output to muscles. That's you, roughly. You're maybe a four-layer thing in that regard. But then you grow all these extra layers of neural tissue, so that the layers are hundreds of cells thick. Hundreds of layers thick. And then you can map a whole bunch of patterns in the external world onto a whole bunch of patterns in the neural world and then onto a whole bunch of patterns in the motor world, and so that makes you dynamically adaptable. But you learned all that through this incredibly painful process of evolution which basically consisted of the death of like 99.999 percent of everything that ever lived. Species and individuals alike. Now, why is that relevant? Well, how do you figure out how to focus in on something? Well, a big part of that is actually--let's see how we do it. Well first of all, what are you focusing in on here? Well not poisonous snakes, and rampaging lions and chimpanzees. Because they're not in here. And the reason they're not in here, roughly speaking, is because you live in a culture that's very very highly advanced and it's got walls like mad. This is a--Carcassonne I think, a French city, medieval city. It still exists. Beautiful city. You see how the medieval people solved this problem. It's like, well you can't deal with much. Well what do you do? Build some walls, keep a bunch of stuff out. You don't have to worry about the rampaging barbarians then because they just can't get in. And so a lot of the reason that you can handle the insane complexity of the world is because it's not even neurological. It has virtually nothing to do with your physiology. It's just that you're in a university. And the university is protected by the city and the city is protected by the province and the province is protected by the country and the country is protected by all of its multiple entanglements. You're inside walls inside walls inside walls inside walls and so on. Your world's pretty simple. You can just sit there in relative warmth and comfort and not have to worry about anything. And so there's one solution: there's a cultural solution. Then inside the cultural solution obviously there's architectural solutions of various sorts. And then there's political and economic institutions that are pretty stable, and they keep you from having to deal with chaos. I mean you can see that chaos breaking out a little bit in the previous weeks, in the American election. Because the trump people and the left wingers are going at it at the Trump rallies. And you can see that's just tinder, that could just blow up at any point and all of that protection that's there because all of these very complex games that we've agreed to play--like the democracy game--that just all flies by the wayside. And all of a sudden you have to contend with what people are like, and that is not something you want to do. There's people, man--they're capable of anything. Which is good, but also really bad. Well then the next thing is, you've got a body. Now that's where the evolutionary process really kicks in. And so the reason your body is the way it is, roughly speaking, is because it's mimicked the external environment. Just like Piaget talks about children using their bodies to mimic the external environment voluntarily, you know, your body is set up through this evolutionary process so that you can focus on precisely that subset of things that seems to keep something like you going for long enough for you to make another one of something that's more or less like you. And it only really works for about a hundred years. That's pretty much where it tops out. And so you don't solve the problem very well. You don't solve the problem of radical complexity very well. But you solve it well enough so that you live long enough to reproduce, speaking strictly biologically. And that appears to be good enough. And part of the reason why you seem to expire, because you might think, well if I--why don't people just live for like 500 years instead of 100 years? Because you'd think that someone who could continue to reproduce for 200 years instead of 100 years would have it all over for someone who could only manage it for 50 years, say. Turns out that your genes have a better time of it if you just put them into a new body and shuffle off this mortal coil so you're not using up too many resources while your children and grandchildren are trying to survive. And so that's an evolutionary solution. Death is not technically inevitable. There are creatures that are roughly immortal. Goldfish, for example, which is really annoying. It's like, really? Goldfish? Because they're a carp and carp basically just keep growing. It isn't obvious that they senesce or age--they get killed because they get diseases and these sort of thing, but there are 300 or 400 year old carp. And some turtles seem to not age really. And then of course your DNA has been there ever since life started, so it doesn't really age either. And it corrects itself. So things can last a very very long time. But not us. Anyways, we're put inside this body that frames things for us and starts narrowing things down. And our psychophysiological selves have a limited range of interests and desires and needs--however you want to construe that--and then that gets instantiated more into the nervous system. It's a mistake to think--people always think your brain is in your head, and that's really not a very bright way of thinking about it. I don't know exactly why we think that way because, well there's the nervous system--you can see it right there. There's a lot of your nervous system that's not in your head. The motor and sensory systems are distributed throughout your body. Your spine is smart enough so that if it gets severed and we put you over top of a treadmill--suspend you--you can walk. You don't know you're walking and you can't control it, but your legs will do a perfectly good job of walking without you being involved at all. So your spine is brain tissue for all intents and purposes. Your brain is distributed through your body. And so, it's evolved so that it's pretty good at going around specifying what it needs. And so we talked about the hypothalamus the other day and how it accounts for what I called sub-personalities that are motivated towards particular ends. And those ends are obviously the things that we would identify as fundamental biological necessities. But then they transform themselves as we interact socially into more and more complex fundamental biological necessities. It's a tricky thing because people talk about needs as if they're biologically instantiated, like they're the fundamental building elements of motivation. But it's not really that obvious, because you might say, well being hungry is a biological need but being a doctor isn't. Well, not really because if you do end up being a physician you pretty much solve the food acquisition problem permanently, right. So it's just a higher order manifestation of the same thing. And it's higher order because instead of just eating once you eat every day for the next 40 years. And instead of just feeding you, you feed you and your family and maybe some other people too. So, thinking of that as something that isn't rooted in biologically is not accurate. It's kind of a continuous complexification. From the simple local time-bound immature subpersonalities that can only fulfill themselves in this moment and with help, to the development of those circuits--which I would say is your personality--that are capable of providing you with what you need in order to live and to be attracted to other people across very large spans of time. It's like a tree, you know. It's a like a tree expanding upward. It's a good metaphor. Alright, so that's fine. Motivation sets up your perceptual frame. And so people often talk about motivation as if it's a drive or a need--not as if those terms are particularly well-defined. A drive I suppose is a deterministic sequence of motor outputs, something like that. But it's not accurate because the motivation actually specifies what you look at. It specifies right what you see. And then it specifies as well what you're going to respond to emotionally. So just imagine this, say I'd offered a 10,000 dollar prize to the person who counts the number of basketballs correctly. And then you're doing your best to count the number of basketballs in the monkey illusion and then somebody stands up in front of you like this, and blocks your view. Well what emotion are you going to feel? It's a negative emotion, right? In all likelihood. And so that might be anxiety, because you're not going to win. It might be fear--it's like anxiety because you're not going to win, but also like--fear because what the hell is this crazy person doing. Anger. Right, that's another negative emotion, although there's a positive attack element to it. Frustration, disappointment, maybe some grief--a whole undifferentiated mess of negative emotions. Well why? Well, in some sense the motivational system specifies the map and the goal. It's a little more complicated than that because it also specifies where you are. But you can think about it as a map with a destination. That's why stories are like that, because we inhabit them. A map's like that all the time. And then what emotions do, roughly speaking, is tell you whether or not things are going the way you want them to as you're on that path. And so the emotions in some sense have to have a motivational specification before they're properly functional. Like, what should you get angry at. Well generally you get angry at things that either interfere with your progression towards a valued goal or upset the entire sub-personality that contains the goal itself. That's a more--what could you call it--that's a more serious failure. It's one to fail when you're trying to do something, it's another thing to fail so hard you have to give up the whole project. We would rather just fail at some sub-element than have to give up the whole project, right. It's one thing to fail an exam, it's another thing to fail at university. And I think the reason for that--I thought about that for a long time--why is it worse to fail out of university, assuming you want to be in university, than it is to fail an exam? How does your brain compute that? Because you can't tell all the consequences, right, so it's not self evident. But it seems to me that it's something like, you think about these functional sub-personalities as having a temporal and spatial range of application. So if you're a university student you're sort of stabilized for four years. Wherever you go, people say "what do you do?" and you can say "I’m a university student." And everybody's happy about that. From an economic perspective it's probably worse than being unemployed, in some sense, but you can't just go tell people that you're unemployed and then you have a nice little high-status slot in society. It doesn't work that way. But you can do that as a university student, you know, so it fulfills your social obligations and it makes you feel like you're doing something at least vaguely useful--I mean apart from the learning and all the other things that are positive about it. So what happens is that that map basically covers that space and time--the time is four years and the space is everywhere you go during those four years. Then if that map burns up it's like you're exposed on all fronts for that entire four year period. And that might even be the two years previously. For example--strange to think that, but if you bail out of university half way through your third year, you've also destructured the map that you used to organize your memories, in some sense, of the previous two and a half years. Because first of all they were the memories of somewone who was doing just fine and going through university, and now all of a sudden they're the memories of someone who failed. Those aren't the same memories. And so it's weird that an error can alter the past, but it can and often does. I mean any relationship breakup that's of any significance will do exactly the same thing, especially if you were betrayed, right. It's like, it's not just the present and the future that dissolve into chaos and take you on a little trip to the underworld. It's also your revision--the necessity of revising your past. So anyways, so then I would say well--failing a class--well the class restructures you in some sense and focuses you for a certain subset of the general going-to-university map. So it's going to be less traumatizing to do poorly on a class than it is to fail out of university because the amount of space and time that those respective maps covers differs. So what you're trying to do always is to lay out a functional game--that's a good way of thinking about it--on the space-time territory that you inhabit. And if you understand that then you can start to understand a little bit about emotions. Now, okay, I have to put a little coda in there and that's: motivations and emotions are not technical terms. They're sort of like id and ego. They're terms that you can use to structure a debate. I showed you the hypothalamus and you see it's made out of all those little nuclei--they're not the same, so you can't say that every part of the hypothalamus is doing something that you can fit into a class: motivation. And motivations and emotions overlap, so, I would say hunger--some of them oversee more purely motivation. If you have an unsettling altercation with someone, it tends not to make you hungry. Whereas it might make you angry, it might make you happy, it might make you sad. So hunger is something that seems to pop up one of these maps and then emotions guide your way through it or tell you where you are on it. But then you have complex motivation-emotions like pain, and also anger. Because pain has a goal in it, right--get away. Or stop, or get away--it's usually get away--but it also has an emotional feeling, right. It feels bad. So it feels like an emotion, pain. Grief is like pain. Disappointment is like pain. Loneliness is like pain. And I mean this technically--all of those things can be addressed rather successfully with opiates, by the way. So technically they're the same. But pain--is being hurt an emotion? Well people will say that, "well I feel hurt." Whatever. And anger is another one of those that's sort of ambivalent because anger has a goal, right: remove obstacle. Remove or destroy obstacle. In a sense, that's the goal of anger. But people talk about it as an emotion. So we're oversimplifying. But it doesn't matter because it's a useful oversimplification and that's sort of what a theory is: a useful oversimplification. Alright, so  I kind of laid out what I think are the basic motivations there. Hunger, thirst, pain, anger, thermoregulation--you don't want to be too hot or too cold--panic or escape, affiliation or care, sexual desire, exploration, play. And you can kind of divide those into self-maintenance motivations and self-propagation motivations, roughly speaking. Sort of just a way to keep track of them. And then emotions--so the hypothalamus is involved in a lot of that. It's not the only thing but it's involved in a lot of that. And so here's sort of how I've conceptualized one of these maps. And we've seen this thing before. You're at point A because if you're using a map, or if you're in a game, there's a starting point or you're a player--either way there's you there--and then you're going somewhere and you have to do something to get there. Okay, so that's the little map, and maybe you have to go make a peanut butter sandwich or you have to go turn the thermostat down or you need to call your friend or whatever. But it's the same kind of structure that you're using in all those different situations. And they switch, you know. Now you're finished being hungry. Now you're thirsty. Then you're lonesome. It's like Sisyphus. It's one damn thing after another, roughly speaking. And so that's what keeps you alive. And you have to be chasing things all the time because your natural tendency is to run out of fuel and decay. That's entropy--you have to fight that. And so that's a continual battle because you're pretty organized and it's really hard for something that organized to just stay organized. It's a lot easier--there's a million ways to mess up your room. There's like one way to clean it. Or maybe 10, you get the point. And it's the same with anything that's extraordinarily complex. There's not that many ways it can stay in order and there's a lot of ways it can fall apart. That's why you're running all the time on a treadmill. You're fighting the second--is it the second law of thermodynamics. Is entropy the second law of thermodynamics? I think so. That's a major one, so good luck in your scrap. Because you're going to need it. So these little underlying biological systems pop up the primary maps and then those are elaborated upwards into maps that are more and more complicated. And the more and more complicated maps maybe solve two problems at the same time for a week. Or they solve 10 problems at the same time for 20 years. That's why you want a job or a career: a whole bunch of problems are solved immediately as soon as you're employed. I mean, you have some other problems, but that's inescapable anyways. Okay so you're inside one of these so you're always motivated. You're always running around after something. And that's another thing to know too because the basic state of human beings is not quiescence, you know. You're not napping in front of a fireplace. If you're not pursuing something that you're motivated to pursue, then generally what you're doing if figuring out how to pursue other things that you're motivated to pursue. And that's exploration. And so if you're not actively motivated by biological necessity, we'll say for the sake of simplicity, then the next motivation kicks in, which is well, prepare for the next time that you are so motivated. And that really accounts for our capacity to explore. We're always zooming around the world trying to figure out what to do with it next, you know. Acquiring more information or--even when we're entertaining ourselves because we're almost always looking at stories when we entertain ourselves. We're still acquiring information that has functional significance and so attractive to us that we find it innately rewarding just to observe that sort of thing. It's even in strange situations, like people will go to horror movies. What's wrong with them? Why do you want to go and get scared? Or disgusted? Because that's horror, right--fear and disgust. Plain uncertainty horror movies like The Blair Witch Project, that's pretty much all fear. And then the slasher movies and that sort of thing, that's pretty much all disgust. And you might say, well why bother exposing yourself to that. And part of it is: to get over it. You know, it's exposure. Because life has terrifying elements and it has disgusting elements, and you're going to have to learn to maintain yourself in the face of that. Certainly illness is going to challenge your capacity to deal with disgust. There's any number of reasons to be terrified so, you go to movies and you practice facing it. And you observe that you can. I mean there's other motivations too, but those are sort of the healthy ones that go along with people wanting to expose themselves to dangerous situations. So even in that you see exploration and preparation for what's going to happen next. And the exploratory circuit is a very very fundamental circuit. It's also hypothalamically mediated. So, the way the hypothalamus works--it's quite cool--is that, on one hand it pops up all these little maps that you can occupy that have their core in, we'll say, biological necessity--so roughly Freud's id--but when those things all shut down because they're satiated, that's a technical term by the way--satiated, it means satisfied--it's a form of reward. So it's sort of how you feel after you've eaten a good meal and you're in a warm room and your friends are around you and maybe you go to sleep if it's your family. Because--I'm thinking of thanksgiving or something like that--everything is just taken care of and so you fall asleep. That's satiation. You can see that in animals all the time because they spend a lot of time satiated. Dogs: they sleep a lot. Cats: they sleep a lot. Because they've already attacked their cat food and so that's pretty much it for the day. Human beings, we tend not so much to enter into states of satiation. Now what happens when you're in one of those little units--one of those little motivated things--there's a couple of things that can happen. [Muttering]. Okay so we talked about motivations as sort of setting up this little frame. And then we can talk about emotions. So, there you are going somewhere. And there's this little straight line that'll take you there, this nice efficient way to get there. Now why do you want to do it efficiently? Well, because you use up the least amount of resources like that so you can maintain some resources for doing the next thing you need to do. So you care about efficiency and simplicity. So you want to go like the crow flies to the destination. So then, what happens along the way? Well, let's say you just get to go straight. Well basically what happens is that you're motivated by your perception of the goal or intermediary goals because the goal can be linked together, and then as long as things are going according to plan, as you move towards the goal in an untrammelled way you're going to feel mild positive emotion. And the reason for that is that you're turning the environment--the environment almost never has... most of it (the environment) is irrelevant. The rest of it has a positive or negative valence. And if things are going according to plan it has a mild positive valence, right. You think things are okay, and really what you're doing is you're observing two things. You're observing that the things that should be happening, if you know what you're doing while you're acting, are happening. And so each step forward is an indication that you're getting closer to your goal. That's incentive reward. And that's the sort of reward that you actually think of as fun. An incentive reward is produced by activation of the exploratory system that's in the hypothalamus--it has its roots in the hypothalamus--and that's the dopaminergic system. And that's the system that cocaine and amphetamines and all those drugs that people really like to take hyperactivates, making them feel like they're doing something important and useful. Even though, in all likelihood, they're not. So the dopaminergic drugs in some sense hijack your incentive reward systems. And it's incentive reward because you're incentivized to continue moving forward. Anything that you look at that makes you want to touch it or move forward to it basically activates the dopaminergic system. Now, so you say, well what happens when you're on your way to somewhere. Well, roughly what happens is neutral things, which is okay. You can ignore them. Positive things or negative things. Positive things happen when things are going according to plan or even better than according to plan. You're walking to school, it's raining, somebody you know stops and offers you a life. It's like, well you're doing okay getting to school and that was fine, but all of a sudden you're getting there a little faster and you're not getting wet. So that cheers you up. It's an indication that you're able to save resources while you're moving towards a goal--dopaminergically mediated. You know, and then we can imagine a different scenario where you're walking to school in the rain and someone drives by you, maybe it's even the same friend, and they don't see you and there's a puddle right beside you and not only do they not stop but they completely cover you with oily and frigid water, and so that's not so good. You're angry about that and upset. Why? Well, you might say, "my day is ruined." What does that mean exactly? Well it means that you had a little map on top of your day and you were hoping that the day and the map would correspond, and then all of a sudden the map burned up and god only knows what's going to happen to the day. And so it's like the bottom has dropped out of your map. And so then you have to worry about your clothes and catching cold and all those things. And turning around and going home and what it'll mean if you miss class and so on and so forth. So basically that's the domain of chaos that we talked about. So that's a negative thing, but it's also--the thing about negative things is they're sort of hard to disentangle from unexpected things. You know, because most of the things that happen to you that are negative are also unexpected because you don't go around trying to make negative things happen. So well, what happens when something negative happens? Well, you get a negative emotion. Pain, anxiety, disgust. Those seem to be the big three. And they're mediated by different systems. We don't understand the disgust system very well. It doesn't load with neuroticism because all the other negative emotions load with trait neuroticism. Pain--pain seems to be what you experience if your receptive surfaces are--you know if your physiological self is subject to stimulation of an intensity that's sufficient either to damage it or to damage the receptors. You know, but pain is complicated. It's not just physical pain from physical damage. It depends on how you define physical damage. If someone dies, that's pain. If you're alone and isolated, that's pain. If you're depressed, that's pain. If you're frustrated or disappointed, that's pain. Frustrated might mean something gets in the way of you moving towards a goal, and disappointment might mean the whole damn structure just collapsed on you. Either way, that's pain. Now the behaviourists would have called that an unconditioned--like a painful stimulus--they would've called that an unconditioned stimulus. You don't have to learn for it to be bad. It's sort of built in bad. And they would think about anxiety in response to the unexpected as learned. The behaviourists would think that you need to learn what predicts something painful. And if you learn that something predicts something painful then you get anxious to it or afraid of it. But it turns out that it's more complicated than that. So what the behaviourists would think is that pain in some sense is the fundamental negative emotion. And then maybe you're a kid and you stand up underneath a table and you whack your head on it when you're learning to walk. And then when you go under the table now you get anxious because you've learned that if you stand up under the table, you bang your head and that hurts. So anxiety under those circumstances is a learned behaviour. It's a conditioned response. Got it? Okay, but it's more complicated than that because anxiety can also be an unlearned response. So if you just encounter something you've never seen before, it's going to make you anxious. There's actually a circuit that mediates anxiety. It's not just a secondary derivation of the pain circuitry. It's its own little unit. And it's sort of like you've figured out over time--evolutionary time--not to get hurt because you don't want to be damaged. But then, you've learned how to detect the probability that you will get hurt for so long that you've also evolved a system just to respond to that. And so some of that responds to things that you have learned are dangerous. Some of it responds to things that are generally just dangerous. Blood, spiders, insects of various sorts, facial expressions that indicate fear or disgust or anger, broken limbs, bodies--especially mutilated ones. You know what's in horror movies, that's all sort of primary fear stimuli, right. And it's built right into you. Now psychologists debate about whether it's built in or whether you can just learn it really easily. But I would say that there's sort of a continuum. Some of it seems pretty damn built-in. Snake-fear, for example. Chimps who've never seen snakes, you bring one into their cage--if it's a rubber snake--poof, they hit the roof. And then they look at it. And snakes in the wild, a chimp will go up to a big snake in the wild and hoot at it. They have a special snake--they call it a snake [rah?]--and they'll look at the thing, and some of them will just look at the snake for like 24 hours. So, partly they're afraid of it. Partly they want to explore it. So what they do, they get close to it and the fear increases, and then they back up and the fear decreases and the curiosity increases. And so what happens is that they move back and forth until they're right on the line where they're afraid, but they're curious. So then they're stuck, and they're looking at it. And you experience that all the time actually, because when you are engaged in something that's meaningful, that's where you are. And that's like the line between order and chaos. You know, because you want to solve it--it's important. Maybe you're reading papers about some illness that you hope to work on or study. It's like, well you're worried about the damn illness, you know. All you're doing is confronting it through the papers so, you know, you're fairly well sheltered from it. But you don't want it to exist and you'd rather it wasn't around, but you're curious so you're going to get engrossed in it. And most of you, to the degree that you're immersed in anything, are partly immersed because you perceive it as a problem. So that's like existential anxiety in a sense. It's just part of being. There's problems that have to be solved. They produce anxiety, they're complicated. You find this--you find a way of approaching them so that the anxiety doesn't overwhelm you and so the curiosity is optimized--that's an incentive reward activation--and then you're awake. Because the anxiety keeps you awake and so does the curiosity. And you think, yeah, this is a good place to be. And it is a good place to be because you're optimally protected right there and you're optimally learning. So yes, that's a good place to be. You can think about that as an answer to the Nietzschean problem of how you create value. You don't exactly create it--you find it. There's problems that need to be solved, they automatically engage your emotions--both positively and negatively--you've got to find the right balance. And it's something like contending, you know. It seems to me like humans beings have to have something to contend with, or they can't tolerate themselves. Because life seems like a stupid joke if you don't have something worthwhile to do. But you can have something worthwhile to do. And so then maybe it's not so stupid and absurd and tragic. And that's at least a good way to think about it. (00:48:00) So you've got satiation on the one hand, on the positive side, and the behaviourists would've considered that an unconditioned response too. They really thought about that as a reward initially. You know, so you take a rat--he's hungry--and you feed him something: reward. Now Skinner, he used to train rats, right, and he was a very--what would you call it--very well renowned behavioural psychologists. And he could train rats to do damn near anything. And what he would do is starve them to three quarters of their body weight--they were basically hungry rats. They were hungry lonesome rats because they lived an isolated existence, which rats don't like, and then they were starved down to three quarters of their body weight. When the behaviourists used rats as a model for people, they actually used hungry lonesome rats as a model for rats as a model for people. And you might think, well what kind of model is that? But it turns out it's a pretty good model, because you're a lot more like a scared hungry rat than you'd like to admit. Which is partly why you can empathize with one, right. Everybody's sitting there thinking "oh the poor rats". By the way, the more you thought that, the more agreeable you are. So how many people were feeling pretty sorry for those rats? Yeah. How about men? How many men were feeling sorry for those rats? Oh yeah, about three. There's a big gender difference in agreeableness between men and women, by the way. Just so you know--we'll talk about that more. So now the behaviourists also thought that you have this primary set of rewards, call them unconditioned, and then you had to learn that some things predicted them. Like, classically maybe, a rat would push a lever and get a pellet. Soon he's pushing that lever like mad. He's pretty happy about pushing that lever. And he learned the conditioned association between lever pushing and getting a reward. But it turns out that because that's been around for so long, you also have a system for it. So it's not just a learned association to what satiates you--it's a whole system. And that's the dopaminergic system. The serotonin system seems to be the thing that satiates. So you know, if you have a big turkey dinner, up goes the serotonin levels--you don't have to do anything. And serotonin is a calming and regulating neurochemical. Which is why antidepressants stop your neurons from taking up serotonin before you've had a real chance to use it to regulate your nervous system. But dopamine tells you, hey, good things are on their way. And that's pretty much what people run on. And you can think about that as hope. So incentive reward is sort of like hope, or promise. I think promise is a better term. So there's pain and satiation, and those are really ancient systems. And then there are newer systems that are anxiety and promise. And those are related to those more fundamental negative and positive emotions. And those things regulate you while you're on your path. Now, there's one more level of complication, because you think, well what can happen on the way to your goal. Nothing? Irrelevant. Okay, so that's the irrelevance that enables you to not see the gorilla. And almost everything around you is irrelevant. And I think that's partly why I think people don't like to have their little maps of the world destroyed. Because if your map of the world is thoroughly demolished everything becomes relevant. And you do not want everything to become relevant. It's just too much for you. So you wake up and you're naked and it's dark in the middle of a jungle. It's like, everything's relevant! You're not going to like that. It's going to burn you out quick. And so most of the time you have to be protected so that almost everything's irrelevant. And then you can focus on the few things that you're capable of handling, and you do that. So you're in your little map, and then as you move towards it your emotions play. And the negative emotions appear when things are not going well and the positive emotions appear when things are going well. That's basically how your emotions work. Now, you've got your satiation and your pain. Then you've got your threat and your promise. Then on top of that you've got a more complicated thing which is novelty, because that's the other thing that can happen when you're on the way from point A to point B. Something you didn't expect--and you don't understand. So  you're walking down the street and there's someone laying there face-down on the sidewalk. And you know, they're dishevelled, and so well, what's your emotional response? Well you didn't expect it, so you're going to be taken aback a bit: that's anxiety. It's like, you're moving towards your goal and anxiety stops you. Now you can think of the space-time area around that person as unexplored territory. Now you don't want any unexplored territory in your map because god only knows what's going to happen there. So what're you supposed to do? Well maybe you cross the street--you think well that person's drunk or maybe you think, well they're a homeless person. Maybe they're lying on a sleeping back--you think they're just asleep. You're going to stop and then you're going to observe, and then you're going to use little cues to try to put your map back together. And your map is, what’s going on here and what should I do about it? And so, it's partly this interplay between anxiety and curiosity. Now you can just step around it and continue, but maybe that'll upset your moral map--what kind of person am I? Maybe I should have done something about it. Or maybe you think, there's no damn way I'm going to get involved in this because, who knows what'll happen if I step in there. And you know, fair enough, because, who knows what'll happen if you step in there. The point is that, it's like your map which has made everything irrelevant has got a hole in it and now some of what's complicated is shining through. And that thing that's shining through--so that's like what the phenomenologists talked about as shining forth--that thing that's shining through, it's like you don't know what to do about it. What should you do? Well, you should do what you do do, and what you do is, you prepare to do everything. And that's an emotional response to novelty. Well, if you don't know what to do you should prepare yourself for anything. And that's stress. You could prepare that something good will happen. Let’s say you're in an ambivalent.
Okay, so today we're going to talk about openness. Now, you might say in some sense that openness is the last discovered of the big five traits, and it's also the one that comes up most weakly in the factor analysis. When Hans Eysenck formulated his trait representation which was extraversion, neuroticism, and psychoticism, he felt that he encapsulated all of the fundamental variation in human personality and he was loathe to include intelligence as a personality trait. Now, the relationship between psychoticism and openness is rather complex. Eysenck basically felt that people could be extraverted and that would be the positive dimension, and could be high in negative emotion and that would be the negative emotion dimension, and that they could also have a predisposition to psychosis. He was thinking about the brain systems that underlie schizophrenia and that tendency to dissociate and develop hallucinations, but also maybe the systems in human beings that are affected by hallucinogenic drugs, which seem to affect human beings differently than they affect other creatures. Eysenck's psychoticism eventually was broken down into low agreeableness and low conscientiousness--it didn't predict the predisposition to psychosis at all. And later factor analysis found that you could load out intelligence and creativity as a personality dimension separately. Now, it's a bit tricky because you have IQ measures and IQ measures are much more direct measures of intelligence then the personality measures. I mean the personality measure is something like: do you think you're smart? You know, I'm being a bit flippant about that because it's more sophisticated than that, but when you talk about someone as a smart person, you're generally referring to the trait that we would describe as openness. You also are doing that when you refer to creativity as a predisposition. And you can measure the smart part a lot better with IQ, and IQ is also a pretty good predictor of creativity. Well, so let's see how they're associated. You remember that you have your big two traits--stability and plasticity--and stability breaks down into conscientiousness, emotional stability, and agreeableness. And then you can see how each of the aspects are correlated--how highly they're correlated. So industriousness and orderliness at about .4, volatility and withdrawal in emotional stability--or neuroticism actually--about .6, and agreeableness and politeness at about .4. And then the next trait is extraversion and openness--that makes plasticity--and people who are high in plasticity tend to be good entrepreneurs, by the way. And extraversion breaks into assertiveness and enthusiasm, correlated at about .5, and then openness and intelligence--the correlation there is lower--it's .35. The average correlation between the big 5 is .2, and the correlation between the big two is about .2. And so you have to remember, you might ask yourself, well is a correlation of .4 twice as large as a correlation of .2? And the answer to that is no, because you have to square them to compare them arithmetically. So a correlation of .2 gives you .04, 4% squared, and a correlation of .4 gives you 16% squared, so there's actually a difference of a factor of 4. And so you need to remember that when you're considering effect sizes so that you can understand exactly what they mean. Now, if you're accounting for 16% of the variance which would be a correlation of .4, then that leaves 84% left unexplained. But that's a bit of an overstatement most of the time in psychology because our measures are rather imperfect and so, for example, if you give someone a personality test and let's say that the validity of their self report is about .6 or .7, which is probably what it is--maybe it might be a little bit higher than that--that means that their self-report is only picking up 50% of the variation in their personality. And if an R derived from that measure accounts for 16% of the variance, in some sense it's twice as powerful as it appears to be. Because the measure is so error-ridden. And a lot of the things that we measure in psychology are error-ridden, and what that means is that the correlations--generally what it means, although not invariably--is that the correlations are bigger than they look. In any case, the correlations that come up in personality research are certainly big enough to be meaningful, and I would say meaningful in terms of predicting major life outcomes and predicting important economic outcomes and that sort of thing. One of the things you might ask yourself is, exactly what does intelligence measure? So we'll start with intelligence, and that would be equivalent to intellect roughly speaking. So intellect in the big 5, the aspect seems to be associated with interest in ideas. Whereas the openness proper aspect seems to be associated with aesthetic sensibility and creativity. That's the best way to think about it, as far as we've been able to figure out. And the biggest relationship is between intellect and intelligence, as measured psychometrically. Now, intelligence is an interesting concept. It's very controversial. In fact, one of the things that continually happens over and over again in psychology is that psychologists discover all sorts of new kinds of intelligence, and the biggest two proponents of that sort of thing I suppose were Bob Sternberg, who came up with this thing he called practical intelligence, and then Howard Gardner, who came up with the theory of multiple intelligences, which had a very large effect on educational psychology when the theory was first proposed. And that's not saying much because, generally speaking, it's very difficult to find a discipline that's more susceptible to fads than educational psychology. As far as I can tell, generally speaking, each fad is worse than the previous one. So, Gardner posited that, I think there were 7 or 8 different intelligences: linguistic, musical, logical, mathematical, spatial, body/kinaesthetic, intrapersonal, and interpersonal. And people talk about emotional intelligence and they talk about practical intelligence. As far as I'm concerned, all of that's complete rubbish. And there's technical reasons for that. I mean, there's technical and philosophical reasons for that. The first thing is, you can't just mess up a word. You know, the whole point of having a word is so that it defines some things, it describes some things, and doesn't describe other things, right. And so you can make the word intelligence account for whatever you want. And so you can say that the ability to dance is a form of intelligence. But the problem with that is you blur out the word so badly, you can't tell what it means anymore. And so I would also point out: we had perfectly good words for those major intelligences. We called them talents. And so it's perfectly reasonable to make a distinction between a talent and intelligence. Now you might say, well how the hell do you know the difference? If things look similar to some degree, then how do you know if they're the same or different? Well that's exactly what you do when you do the construct validity process. So let's say you rated a number of people on their dancing ability. And then you rated a number of people on their ability to multiply two two-digit numbers in their head quickly. Well then, you see technically, if both of those were intelligences, then the people who could dance better could multiply two-digit numbers faster in their head. They would be slightly positively-- *coughs* --see that's what happens when I don't have any diet coke. So anyways, if intelligence was the right word to subsume both of those, then what you'd see is there'd be a high correlation. The people who were good dancers would also be the ones who could multiply most rapidly--I mean multiply in their head. But you're not going to be able to extract out a single factor like that. It's just not the case that those things associate like that. So for something to be one phenomena, the things that it-- *coughs* -- obviously I've talked too much this semester. All the things that are subsumed under that definition have to be correlated. And highly correlated. Because otherwise they're not the same thing. It's the definition of the same thing. Now IQ is a very peculiar construct, a very unique construct from a psychological perspective. But also, more generally, from a social science perspective because IQ has the most predictive validity of anything ever discovered in the social sciences, period. Now the other thing that is interesting about IQ is that a lot of the people who were interested early in the measure of intelligence were engineers turned psychologists. And the engineers have actually had quite a whopping effect on psychology. Part of the reason that psychology has an advanced methodology and advances statistical techniques is because we got invaded by engineers in the early part of the 20th century, and so the engineers made our measurements much more rigorous than they would have otherwise been and it's been a huge advantage. I mean, one of the things that's happening to psychology is that it's starting to eat other disciplines. It's had a massive effect on economics and it's going to have a massive effect on political science. And the reason for that is because we know how to measure things, and it actually turns out to matter that you know how to measure things. Obviously, I mean if you're going to be talking about something that's specific and well-defined, first of all, if you can't make it specific and well-defined, all you can really do is argue about it. And there are better and worse arguments, but the problem is that just because an argument is good doesn't mean it's right. And that's a big problem. It's also something to remember when you're arguing about people that you have a relationship with because if you happen to be better at structuring your arguments and you're more verbally fluent, and perhaps more assertive and perhaps less agreeable, you're going to win the argument. But that doesn't mean you're right. Unfortunately it's not that simple. And so as far as I can tell, the empirical process is restricting or eliminating the catastrophically detrimental effects of pure theory. Well, and our measurement techniques have been pretty good about that. Okay so now what happens with IQ here? I can define IQ for you just so you know what it is. Imagine that you had a library of questions. So here's some questions. There's millions of questions in this data bank. What's 2 times 68? What's the capital of Georgia? What's the definition of hypertrixanemia? What comes after in this sequence: 2, 4, 8, 16? Remember these numbers--so I'd tell you the numbers and you'd have to tell me them back--2, 4, 1, 3, 5, 7, 6, 12, 15, 14, 18, 20, 22. And then I might ask you, in fact, to remember them backwards, and that's a working memory test. Okay, so those are all questions that require abstraction and mental operations: that's the key as far as I can tell. So you might say, exactly what constitutes an abstraction? And it looks to me like what an abstraction is--there's the capacity to formulate an abstraction and there's the capacity to manipulate them. To formulate an abstraction, I think what you do is you take a phenomena and you represent it with something that's low resolution. That's more or less what an abstraction is. So, for example, if I imagine this classroom later, my imagined representation is going to be of much lower resolution than the actual classroom, but it's sufficient for certain purposes. Just like a thumbnail on a computer is sufficient for certain purposes. And then once I simplify the phenomena in question, then I can also perform certain operations on it, say, in imagination or semantically, and the capacity to generate that abstraction and the ability to manipulate those seems to be the core element of intelligence. And I think part of the reason why intelligence, roughly speaking, is a human dimension--although obviously you can to some degree rank order animals in terms of their capacity to learn, but there's this whopping differentiation between human beings and animals in this area particularly--is because we can use abstractions. Now, I heard a woman named Temple Grandin speak once and it was a very interesting talk. She's very autistic, but very brilliant, which is not very common for people who are autistic because usually it's associated with a substantial amount of intellectual impairment. But she also had an extraordinarily devoted parent who spent almost all her time trying to pull her daughter out of her autistic isolation. Now Grandin has gone on to become a University of Chicago professor--and she works in the agricultural area--and she has redesigned the chutes, the walkways basically, that take cattle to the slaughter house. And she's done that to make them much less stressful for the animals. And part of the reason she can do that, as far as she's concerned, is because she thinks like an animal. And what that means, as far as she can tell, is that she cannot generate an abstraction--not easily. Now she can speak so obviously she learned to do it to some degree, but she talked more about deficits in imagination or concretization of imagination. So one of the weird things that you see with autistic kids, not frequently but now and then--there's actually a famous example of this on the web. There's a guy, I think he's from Britain, and you can take him in a helicopter and fly him over a city, and then he can stand in front of a piece of paper, like 12x8, start anywhere, and draw the entire city. Now and then you see autistic savants who are children who can draw perfectly realistically, and so maybe they'll draw a horse and they don't even start the horse like a kid would--like a normal kid would sketch the outline of the horse and put some eyes in. They put some eyes in and make the horse perfectly detailed. And what Grandin claimed was that-- she said okay, you think of "house" or think of "church". And she says, what comes to mind if you think of church? And maybe she'd say, well you get this little image of something that's sort of shaped like this with a steeped on top or a cross or something like that, and that's a church. And so maybe you think of house and it's like a little kid's house. It's got a rectangle and a parallelogram--that's not a parallelogram, whatever the hell you call that thing on the top--and then it's got a chimney with smoke coming out of it, right. Two windows and a door. House. Yeah, but there are no houses like that. Each individual house looks a lot different than that. And so in order to have that conception of house, essentially what you have to do is you have to take that class of all possible houses and extract out the features that are common across all of them. And that's an abstraction. And so, as far as Grandin's concerned, she doesn't have abstractions like that. When you ask her to think of "church", she remembers "a church". It's always singular instances. Now the thing about human beings is that we perceive singular instances to some degree, although I think our abstraction capacity often interferes with our ability to do that. But we also perceive abstractions. And you can kind of tell this if you're ever trying to learn to draw. Like if I say, draw a hand. You guys, most of you unless you have artistic training, you're going to draw what's essentially a hieroglyphic hand. I think the drawings that children come up with aren't drawings; I think they're hieroglyphs. They're abstracted representations that are quasi-linguistic. They're not artwork, they're proto-language. And hieroglyphs of course were one of the earliest forms of written language. It makes sense, because if you want to communicate about something, why not draw an image. And eventually the image turns into a word. But I actually think that's the developmental progression of language among human beings. It's the abstracted image first and then it's the word. Anyways, if you drew a hand, you'd likely draw a hieroglyphic hand: 5 fingers or maybe even 4, right, because that's what animators do. You can't fit all those sausages on one circle. So they just simplify it down to 4 and no one even cares. You watch an animated program, which is highly abstracted--I mean Homer Simpson looks nothing like an actual person. Like really tremendously unlike an actual person, and it's completely irrelevant. After two or three seconds it doesn't matter at all. Which is also why I think 3D movies--it's never a technology that's ever caught on. Because after the first 4 seconds, who the hell cares. It's irrelevant whether you see in three dimensions because you don't need much information to actually structure your perception. Now if you want to see your hand--weirdly enough--so that you can draw it, you have to snap out of your normal mode of perception. I find often it's a lot easier to do that with one eye closed because it flattens it out. And then you have to stop looking at your hand as if it's a hand. You have to look at it again like it's an object. And as soon as you do that it's actually rather shocking because it's such a strange looking thing. If you put your hand in a non-canonical position *gestures* --that's a canonical position, I would say--if you put your hand in a non-canonical position and then look at it, it's the weirdest shaped thing. It's quite shocking to see it, you know. And then you can draw it--once you can actually see it like that--but before that, you're pretty much stuck in "hand". So anyways, I think what happens with intelligence is that people are capable of abstracting and then they can manipulate abstractions. And so let's take another look at what abstractions might be. Now part of the reason that I think abstraction is so useful is because things are really really complicated and it's going to be a lot more difficult to manipulate the actual thing than to manipulate some representative abstraction of it. So if you could get an abstraction that captures the gist of the entity--now how we do that is not exactly obvious--but if you can, then you can expend a lot more resources concentrating on the relevant parts of the entity and a lot less time concentrating on the irrelevant parts. So for example if you ask a child to draw a house, what colour the house is is irrelevant. Now why it's irrelevant is not exactly obvious. I guess it's because colour can vary across houses. And colour varies across all sorts of other things, and so colour turns out to be a non-canonical element of "house" and so you can just dispense with it when you're thinking about a house. You'd say, well it doesn't matter what colour the house is--it's still a house. So what exactly defines those features that make something a house rather than something else are not that easy to figure out. You could say, well, a house has four walls and a roof. And those are the external walls and I guess you could identify the minimal necessary components, but even that's not so simple. And you could say a house is also something that someone lives in, which allows you to put caves as houses because caves obviously share very little in common with the standard house. My point is that it's difficult exactly to figure out what set of features we do use to determine whether something is a member of a class. There's this guy named Gigerenzer who’s thought about this a lot, and he thinks that they're a combination of objective and functional, basically. And that enables us to do things like come up with a category of "things you would take from your apartment if it was on fire". Which is a really interesting category because most of the things that you're going to take bear very little resemblance--it's hard to see why they make a category. Pets, family members--probably in that order--photo albums, identification, what else might you take? Your phone, I suppose. What else would you take out of an apartment during a fire? Well you guys would be out on the street stark naked obviously. Well you get the point is that those things that I just mentioned seem to share very little in terms of objective features in common, but there's some reason that they still cohere as a category. Alright, so why do you need to abstract? Well, because you can handle the complexity of the world better. Even your perception is a form of abstraction, you know, because when you look at someone, a lot of the abstraction is done for you because you just can't perceive very well, but when you look at someone--first of all, you only see the surface of them that's facing you and not the other surface, so that's a big limitation. You only see them now in this split second, rather than extended across time. You don't see any of their microstructure beyond the general pattern of the physiology at this level of resolution. You don't see anything beyond that. I can't see your cells or your organs or anything like that, which is actually a real problem often for us. And I can't see the systems that you're part of. So right off the bat, just to perceive gives you a low resolution representation, and a lot of that is limitations of your processing. Your eyes just can't zoom in that far. You don't have the cortical capacity to improve your vision. Plus, how much do you really want to see at one time? No more than necessary, whatever that means. And evolution seems to take care of that problem. So your perception abstracts for you right away, but then I would say maybe you make a leap from perception to conception, something like that. And so that would be the leap from the perception of the actual object to the image of the object, and then a leap from the image of the object to the word. So it looks to me that a word is a representation of an image which is a representation of an object or a situation--it's something like that. And you need those because you have to deal with a complex world. So here's one way of thinking about it. Look at the top left corner of that diagram. I call that the thing in itself, and what it is is an array of dots, roughly speaking, and--I think there's 350 dots there--and you might say, well--and then if it was a real world object you could imagine that would be in three dimensions, not two, because that's two, and it would be transformed because it would be also extended across time. And it would have microstructures that were far smaller than that and macrostructures that were far bigger, so even that is an abstraction, but I'm using a fairly complex abstraction to represent the thing in itself. That's the thing you cannot perceive, right. What something actually is. You just get an image. And then the next five things are ways you could look at that. So you could say, well, it's a rectangle. You could say it's four rectangles, and forget about the dots. You could say that it's--I think that's 16 lines or, what is it, 32 lines? 24 lines. So if that thing in itself was an orchard and you were going to walk south to north through it, that would be a good representation. Those would be corridors, roughly speaking, and then object four is a combination of object one and object two. And then object five is, well, all that's blurred out are the little groups of six dots. And so you might say, well, what is that thing? And then the answer is, well it's any of those five things. And so that's an interesting way of thinking about it too because one of the things it shows you is that you can disagree about what something is right at the level of perception. And then you might say well which of those is the best representation? And the first answer might be, well, the most complex one: the one in the left-hand corner. But that's not necessarily the case--it might depend on what you want the representation for. Like imagine--it's weird, it's weird--because imagine you have a map, okay. And so you think, well I'm going to make the best map in the world, and so you make a map that's exactly the same size as the territory that it represents and has all the detail. Well that's not any use at all, that thing, because you could just use the territory, right? Just because, as a map gets increasingly detailed, to some degree, it's increasingly useless as a map. And so what you need is this weird combination between accuracy and simplicity. And so you want your map to be no more complicated than is necessary than to take you from point A to point B, that's it. Because otherwise, it wouldn't be simple to use and the additional complexity would limit the utility of the map. So you might say that what we're trying to do with our intelligence is to get what we need with the least amount of effort possible. And there's a sort of Piagetian idea that's lurking behind that, which is: you have limited resources, you don't want to expend more energy than is necessary, and you want to build representations of the world that suffice to keep you going now and then next week and next month, and then along and then in groups. And so you build a representation of the world that has some concordance of the thing in itself, but has this functional simplicity so that you can actually use it in the real world. Alright, so back to this diagram. So I've got the object and five representations, and then there are ways of representing it linguistically at the bottom. What that is--the words are basically a simplification of something that's already simplified. So intelligence seems to have something to do with the process of functional simplification. Now, back to the library of questions. So you have this database of questions and so then what is you is pull out a hundred questions, randomly. Alright, and you want to pick out a hundred because if you just pick out one--like if I asked you what the capital of Georgia was and I asked you what the capital of Georgia was, and you got it wrong and you got it right, I couldn't really say with any degree of certainty that that means that you have more intelligence. Because the probability that I'd get an accurate measure with one question is quite low, but if I used three questions, well then, I would start to become--my measurement would start to become less error-ridden, and if I used 10 it would even be better, and if I used 20... For a personality questionnaire, the rule of thumb--and this is just a rule of thumb--is that, if you don't have 20 questions in the questionnaire then you don't have enough questions to really generate a reliable measure. So you'll still see single item measures used in psychology, but you can add additional accuracy by increasing the number of items. I designed an IQ test a while back and we got a pretty good reliability and pretty good validity. Reliability is, you know, you test the same set of people twice and the rank order of their performance stays the same. So if you got 90 on the previous on the previous test you'd get 90, and if you got 95, because you're more intelligent in this example, if you got 95 on the last one you'd get 95 on this one. So that's reliability. We could get a pretty reliable IQ test with nine items, but it was substantially improved with 17. And with increments you get a, what would you call it, diminishing returns. So a hundred is plenty. Okay, so you pull out a hundred questions and then you take 100 people and you gave them those questions, and then you score them--right and wrong, that's all there is--and then you sum the scores. Okay, so basically, the sum behaves like the average--let's say you average the scores just to make the argument a little bit more straightforward. You average the scores, and so each of you gets the average calculated across the times that you were right and wrong, so it's an approximation of the frequency of how right you were, and then we rank order you: 1 to 100. That's IQ. That's all there is to it. Now people say IQ doesn't exist. Well, that's annoying, because all they're doing is gerrymandering the definition of the word exist. You know, because you can do that: if you ask if A is equivalent to B, the answer is, it depends on what you mean by A and what you mean by B. It's almost always a foolish question because you can take B and A and bend them and twist them in such a way that you can make one thing another thing without too much problem. People usually get around that by only using a word in a context, right--in a sentence or a phrase or a paragraph that defines the word so that you can't weasel around like that. But more specifically in psychology, we have methods to tell if something is real, and if IQ doesn't pass the test of reality for a psychological measure, then no other psychological measures pass the test because they're validated exactly the same way IQ is, and they don't work as well. So you can say, well no, that's not real, but then you have to throw out--you probably have to throw out the social sciences completely insofar as they're actually sciences. Because the same statistics are used to generate their findings. So you can't just say, well this really powerful thing doesn't exist while a bunch of these weak things exist and they're measured the same way. You don't get to play that game. Okay, so does it exist? Well you can measure it reliably, so that's definitely something. You know, because you might say, well does your shadow exist? Well, generally speaking under normal conditions you could measure your shadow relatively reliably. Does it exist? Well, it passes one test of existence. You can't detect it with a number of senses--you can't touch it--for example, but whether or not something exists is actually a rather tricky question. But  you can measure it and it's useful, and that's not a bad definition of "exist". So, what's it good for? Well, it predicts major life outcomes, and importantly. And we can talk about the power of intelligence momentarily. If you were actually going to calculate an IQ score per se, you would take the rank order that I just described and you would correct if for age, because you can't really expect a 7 year old to know as much as a 15 year old or a 20 year old, so generally speaking if you take a technical IQ test, it will rank order you but it will only rank order you with people the same age as you. So that's just another, you know, it's an additional correction, whether or not that actually gives you a more accurate estimate of IQ depends on what you mean by accurate. A very bright 7 year old generally doesn't know enough to do much useful in the way of work, but they can learn extremely quickly, and so if you compare 7 year olds to people of other ages purely in terms of their score on an IQ test, there's a high probability that you would underestimate their speed of learning. By the same token though, by the time you're 40 you have a lot of accumulated knowledge, and so if you only measured learning speed then you would overestimate the 7 year old's advantage over the 40 year old. IQ is basically a unitary phenomena, but you can fractionate it into...it's very very complicated, for reasons that I'll tell you about in a minute. If you had to divide IQ into two, the way you would divide it would be into crystallized and fluid intelligence. And fluid intelligence would be, roughly, the ability to learn. And crystallized intelligence would be, roughly, a measure of how much you've learned. Now those are separate to some degree, and here's why they're separate: as you age, your capacity to learn decreases. It's quite ugly. So by the time you're about 24, you're starting to get stupider, from the perspective of being able to learn. And that's just pretty much a linear trip downhill until you depart the world. So it's nasty to see because it's quite a steep generation. You can stave that off, by the way, with cardiovascular exercise and weightlifting--so that's the best way to keep your learning capacity intact. It's not to do cognitive exercises, it's to do physical exercises. And then as you age, the amount you know goes up and what happens is those two things actually tend to average out. Now you might say, well if I'm claiming that IQ is a unitary thing, how can I make the claim that you can divide it into two elements and that those elements are in some sense separate. And I think the reason is for this: your prefrontal cortex, roughly speaking--so that's the part of your brain here forward--you can think about in part, it's the part that does the programming of motor activity--voluntary motor activity--but it also seems to be...so let's say you're doing something new and you're pretty clunky and awkward at it, and then you do it more and more and you get smoother and smoother and smoother at it, and you automatize it. What happens is you're using your prefrontal cortex and, to some degree, your whole right hemisphere as you're first doing it, and then as you get better and better at it the ability shifts to the left and then goes backwards. So what's happening, to some degree, is your prefrontal cortex is programming the rest of your brain. And you can think of fluid intelligence as a measure of the ability of your brain to program itself, and crystallized ability as a measure of how much programming is there. So they're separate in that manner because they perform separate functions, but then you can also understand that the better your programmer is, the better your programming is going to be so that inflates the correlation. And so you can have to separate things functionally--that are even dissociable in terms of age--but because they work so tightly together--it's like, how fast can you dig a hole and how big is the pile of dirt? Well obviously those two things are different in some important sense, but they're going to be highly correlated because the faster you can dig a hole, the bigger the pile of dirt. So anyways, crystallized intelligence is also often measured as verbal intelligence, but the better measure fundamentally is crystallized intelligence. Now, you know how we looked at the personality hierarchy, right--that was this *gestures to slide*. And what you see is three strata, roughly speaking: aspect, trait, superfactor. And it looks like--the superfactors, I would say, the validity of those superfactors is not yet clear. You can get a lot of useful prediction by looking at the traits, and there's more and more evidence--there's about 400 studies now using the aspects--there's more and more evidence that you can also derive additional useful predictive validity from differentiating the personality down to the aspect level. So that's the highest resolution personality level we have. There are people who claim that there's something at the apex which you might call "good personality", but I don't think so. I think it's--I don't think so. You'd have to read the literature to understand the dispute--it's a statistical dispute roughly speaking--but we've found in our research that stability and plasticity are only correlated at 0.2. They're pretty separate. So I'm going to stick with that for now even though it might be wrong. Okay, so  if you read the cognitive literature and the neuropsychological literature, you will find that neuropsychologists tend to assume that there are forms of cognitive ability that you cannot describe as IQ. And they make that claim because they'll take a test and they'll use the test to measure something, and then they'll correlate that with IQ and the correlation will only be about 0.2 or 0.3. And they'll say, well that's not a high enough correlation to justify saying that those things are identical--because the correlation should be more like 0.8 for them to be identical. But the problem is, let's say I had a measure if your IQ and your IQ and your IQ and your IQ, and then I asked you two questions, and you and you and you, and I summed your answers, whether they correct or incorrect. Now what would happen is, there'd be some correlation between your total score on those two questions and your overall IQ. Maybe it would be 0.3. But that wouldn't justify me in claiming that the two question IQ test is different from the full scale IQ test--it's just worse. And you're going to run into this problem when you read psychological literature and if you ever do any research because it's very difficult to determine whether you get what's called "discriminant validity" which is, this thing measures this thing, and this thing measures this thing, and they're actually different. Or whether you just have a lousy measure of this and a lousy measure of this and so the correlation is low. Now here's a neuropsychological test, and you can make the case that this is measuring something different than IQ. So imagine that you see an array of 12 pictures--they're just drawings, drawings of a telephone and a booth and a chair--just common objects. So you see 12 of them. And then you have to click one, and then when you do that, they move. And then the next time you have to click one you haven't already clicked. And then they move again and you click, and then they move again and you click. And you see by about the time that you get to about 8 of them, you're starting to run into trouble because it's difficult to remember more than 8 abstractions simultaneously--7 actually, and some people claim it's as low as 4--that's the capacity of working memory. Which is why we kind of like phone numbers to be 7 digits long. A lot of the things we want to just remember are 7 units long, and if we want to remember more than that, we chunk. Although if I show you some dots *draws dots* how many dots? 3. You don't have to count them. You can see 3 dots. *draws more dots* You can see 4 dots. It's not obvious that you can see 5 dots. At that point you start to go "3 and 2". And then if there's 6 dots, well that's how they would be arranged on a dice, right. The reason they'd be arranged on a dice that way is because you can see two sets of three and infer 6. You know, if they're sort of randomly dispersed like that, and I say well how many dots is that, well you have to count them. And what that shows you is that your working memory--which is really a function of fluid intelligence--is a very very narrow thing. And it's like your vision. You know, remember we saw the gorilla video, right, and you can only pick up the thing that you're attending to. Well working memory is like that, it's this narrow narrow form of attention and it sort of specifies unitary phenomena--I mean that's not quite unitary but it's close enough. And I think the reason it does that--it's like, why's your attention so narrow--is because often what you're trying to do as you work in the world is to make binary choices. You know, you don't want to choose between 20 things, you want to choose between two things, because then when you choose between two things you can actually act. If it's still two things you can't act, if it's one thing you can act. So imagine you go into a Chinese restaurant is a good example, because Chinese restaurants virtually always have like 400 items on the menu. and you might ask yourself, well how the hell do you figure out what you want. And what you don't do is go through every single menu item and contemplate it because then you'd be there for a week. So what you seem to do is eradicate chunks. So you might say, well I'm not in the mood for anything but fish. Okay, bang, three-quarters of the menu disappears. You know, and then you might go, well I don't want it breaded. Whack, and then another half is gone and now you're down to maybe 8 choices. And, you know, you reduce that to 4 and then to 2 perhaps. Well I'd like this or I'd like that. But the waiter doesn't care about that. The waiter wants to know which one you want, because until it's reduced to one you don't get to act. And so the reduction, the reduced narrow strip that we use to perceive the world in partly is a consequence of processing inadequacy. But it's also partly because we really are trying to reduce things all the time to 0 and 1, yes and no. Okay, so back to the three stratum theory of cognitive abilities. Now, you've got this array of 12 items and it keeps shifting. And what I would do is score you by the number of duplications--if you pick the same item more than once, you lose a point. So the maximum points you can get is 12 and, you know, people usually make 3 or 4 mistakes. And so I can take your score on that test--maybe I'd give it to you 2 or 3 times just to make sure I have a reasonably stable indicator--and then I could correlate it with your full-scale fluid IQ. And I'd get a correlation of about 0.25 or 0.3. Now, if you don't know anything about psychometrics you'd say, well that's obviously measuring something different than full scale IQ because it only correlates at 0.25 or 0.3. But what it turns out is, no: it's more analogous to the problem that we were just talking about where I asked you three questions and tried to derive your entire IQ from that. It's just a bad measurement. Now what happens is if you take the neuropsychological tests that people have developed, that theoretically assess the different parts of the brain, and you factor analyze them and you extract out a single factor, the single factor looks exactly like fluid intelligence. Now, is it exactly the same as fluid intelligence? The onus would be on the person who claims it's not to demonstrate the difference. We did give university students a very extensive battery of pre-frontal-cortical tests and measured their IQ, and then we used the pre-frontal-cortical test average and the IQ to predict grades. And what we did find was the pre-frontal tests predicted over and above the IQ. But we thought maybe, if you took the pre-frontal average and IQ and you added them to predict grades, say--that's a regression analysis--they both added in. So they predicted different parts of the variation. It added additional necessary information. However, if you took all the neuropsychological tests and all the individual IQ tests and you put them in one data set and then extracted out a single factor--so that would be fluid intelligence, roughly speaking--that predicted grades very well. And then what was left over didn't predict at all. So what we concluded was that neuropsychological tests--pre-frontal-cortical tests--test intelligence, and they test a slightly different thing than fluid intelligence tests do, but that isn't because they're testing something different, it's because fluid intelligence tests the way they're currently constituted--don't sample the universe of potential questions as well as they should. So it wasn't that we discovered something different, we discovered a measurement error, roughly speaking. That only took 5 years by the way. It took 5 years to figure that out. It was very annoying because when we started I was trying to predict grades, you know, and I didn't know the IQ literature very well at that point, because psychologists don't usually teach it very much, because IQ bothers the hell out of everybody. And so, and the neuropsychologists who have their own field are motivated to make the claim that they've discovered something new and I just took that on face value. But then we tried to predict--like okay if I'm going to predict how well you do at your job, well I want to get a good cognitive measure because if it's a complex job it keeps changing and you have to learn to keep up, and if you can't do that, you're not going to do very well. So that would be bad for you and it would be bad for everyone around you. And so we were trying to pick up additional information that would enable the accuracy of the prediction to be increased, and looked at the neuropsych literature but, at most, it was an ambivalent success. (00:49:25) Okay, so how does that relate to this? Well at the bottom tier, where it's the most differentiated, you have single tests. And they're only correlated with each other at about 0.2, maybe 0.3. So you might say, well, they're all measuring different things--they're not. They're all measuring the same thing badly. And then you might clump them. So let's say I ask you--oh god--maybe I give you a test that asks you--that tested your vocabulary with 6-letter words, and then I gave you another test that tested your vocabulary with 7-letter words, and then another one that tested your vocabulary with 8-letter words. And I said, well those are all different tests. Well they would correlate quite highly--not perfectly--but I could clump them together and make one sort of super test out of them. And then I could take supertest A and supertest B and supertest C and look at the correlations between those, and those would climb to about 0.5 or 0.6. And then if I clumped the supertests together, which would be happening by the time we got to stratum 2 there, then the correlation between the tests would start to rise to about 0.7. And then if I collapsed all the supertests into a single measure, then the correlation between any of those stratum 2 tests and G, because that would be the highest level thing--G is general intelligence, that's roughly speaking fluid intelligence--the correlation between any of the supertests and G would be about 0.8. So the point of all this--there's no way of discussing this sort of thing without doing it statistically and technically because they are statistical and technical processes. So what happens is that, now let's say now you have a measure of fluid intelligence. Okay, you've got this measure. And you take one of the stratum 2 sets of tests and you use both to predict academic achievement. What happens is that the superfactor, G, kills the rest of them. You're just not going to be able to find any of the tests in the bottom strata that are going to add to the prediction of what the general factor can give you. Now with personality, that's just not the case. You can't pull out a single factor that predicts how personality is going to influence job performance across your life. If you add neuroticism--if you take a single factor and you add neuroticism, neuroticism is going to kick the single factor out. Conscientiousness is going to kick the single factor out, and so forth. Because there isn't a single factor. It's not--the tests aren't highly correlated enough to say that they're all measuring the same thing to some degree. The personality traits really are different. You know, you can clump them into plasticity and stability, but even there you're maintaining a lot of validity. So if I took stability and used conscientiousness to predict job performance, conscientiousness would wipe out stability--it'd be a better measure. But you never get that--you virtually never get that with the lower tests in the IQ strata. Okay, now *mumbling*. That's a good representation of how these things are associated. So at the bottom you have the single tests and then they chunk into, say, sequential reasoning, quantitative reasoning, and induction on the fluid intelligence side, and general knowledge and language development on the crystallized intelligence side--that's the red--and then they're all subsumed underneath fluid intelligence, which is the measure that you really want to have. Okay, so what good is that? Well, it basically correlates 0.5 with major life outcomes. And that's 25% of the variance, and maybe you can get it a bit higher than that, but we'll just stick with 0.5 as a representation. And so, let's  say you take a bunch of students, 100 of them, and you want to sort them into those who will pass the class with a 50% failure rate. So you just pick them randomly--you're going to pass, you're going to fail, you're going to pass, you're going to fail. So that's no knowledge. I have no predictive knowledge whatsoever. So my validity--the validity of my classification is basically going to be equivalent to chance: zero. Right, I'm only going to have a 50% chance of picking who passes and who fails. If I used IQs--if I had all your IQ scores--and I did the prediction, I'd get it right 75% of the time. So it's a huge difference. It cuts the failure rate in half by using IQ. And IQ is a very good predictor of health, it's a predictor of longevity, it's a predictor of resistance to post traumatic stress disorder, it's a predictor of--obviously--occupational status, it's a prediction of educational success, it's a predictor of income. It's a very powerful predictor. And here's another way of conceptualizing its effects. So imagine you could choose how you were going to be when you were born--this is in North America because it's going to vary by society, at least to some degree. You get to be born into a family that's at the 95th percentile for wealth, or you get to be born at the 95th percentile for intelligence. Who's better off at the age of 40? And the answer is the person who picks being born with an IQ in the 95th percentile at birth. It's a more powerful predictor of long-term life outcome than familial wealth. And it shows up everywhere. One of the things we did recently was look at disgust sensitivity--we're going to talk a little bit about that when we talk about conscientiousness because orderly people seem to be more sensitive to disgust than disorderly people. That seems to be why they’re orderly. But, the higher you are in IQ, the less disgust sensitive you are. Now we don't know exactly why that is. Maybe it's because, you know, maybe you could make the inference that IQ is related in some way to the physiological integrity of the cortex rather than the limbic system, which is the source of, say, emotions and motivations. And the more powerful it is, the more inhibitory capacity it has over the more fundamental motivations and emotions. You could make that case. The problem is that intelligent people don't necessarily seem to be any less impulsive, so... and you can have a pretty vicious personality disorder that's characterized by extremely disorganized behaviour and a complete inability to put long term plans into operation, and still have a high IQ. So, one of the things we really can't figure out--it's just a hell of a thing to try to figure out. Like the relationship between IQ and industriousness is zero. And that just makes no sense to me because most of the brain models are predicated on the idea that your ability to engage in long-term planning is a factor that's associated with intelligence. But then industriousness people seem to not only engage in long-term planning, they seem to do it right so that if they're more industrious and they put their plans into operation, then the plans seem to actually work. But it's not correlated with IQ. So then I can't figure out, well obviously the industrious person, in some way, is able to regulate their own behaviour. You know, well they're not procrastinating, for example. And you'd think that that--the ability to not procrastinate--would be a cognitive feature, but it doesn't seem to be. And we have no idea what makes people industrious, and we can't figure it out. So it's this incredibly potent predictor--it's just about as powerful as IQ--and we have no idea what it is. So if you think you have a smart idea about that and you want to pursue it, feel free because there's a big mystery there that no one's been able to crack. And we've been at it for a long time and have had almost no success. You know, we had people do things like, we'd give them sentences of n’s, m's and u's--sort of randomly distributed--and then we'd have them count the u's. You know, like a whole page of sentences--they’re not sentences, they're just strings of letters. Count the u's--how useless! You'd think that someone industrious would do that better. They don't. That's an IQ test. The people who can count the u's faster have higher IQs. Almost everything that you would do where it has to do with manipulations of abstractions of any sort--even something that basic--seems to be fundamentally associated with IQ. People with higher IQs have slightly bigger heads, if you control for body size. They have slightly bigger brains, if you control for body size. The axons on their neurons are a bit thicker, so the electrical messages seem to travel a little bit more efficiently. They are slightly faster in simple reflex tests. So it goes right down to the level of...because a simple reflex--a light goes on, you push a button--there's not many neurons mediating that response. You know, chains of neurons. There's only a few neurons communicating so that you can do that. But even at that relatively simple processing level, IQ is associated with speed. So there's a physiological component. You're less likely to develop Alzheimer's disease if you have a high IQ. And maybe that's just because your brain is more robust. You know, so you could sustain damage, say, of up to 50% of your brain and you wouldn't even show it if you have a sufficiently high IQ. Whereas if you're on the bottom end of the IQ distribution, you're much more--you seem to be much more susceptible to physiological damage. Nutrition is a big predictor of IQ variation. And a lot of that's been hammered out of modern societies. You know, so 150 years ago people's IQ was pretty tightly associated with their nutritional status, but now there are very few people in North America who don't have enough to eat, even though there's some variation in quality of diet. And that's flattened out a lot of the cultural variability in intelligence. Okay, so this guy named Hemphill did this paper--an American psychologist a while back--and one of the things he was interested in doing--remember we talked about effect sizes, right. How big is an effect in psychology or in social sciences in general? And people have used rules of thumb that 0.5 was a moderate effect and 0.3 was a minimal effect and 0.2 was starting to diminish to the point of non-utility. But what Hemphill did instead of guessing, because that was just a guess, was actually go and look at papers that were published in psychology to see what effect sizes were being reported. So it's empirical analysis of how big the effects that psychologists and other social scientists report. And so what he found was that the highest third of paper or the third of papers that had the biggest effects reported effects from 0.35 to 0.78, the middle third from 0.21 to 0.33, and the lower third from 0.02 to 0.21. *mumbling* If you look on the left side here you see an r of less than 0.15 characterizes the first quarter of published studies. An r of 0.15 to 0.35, the next quartile. So 50% of psychological studies report an r of less than 0.35. 90% report an r of less than 0.5, and only 7 to 8% report an r of 0.5 or above. So what that means is that the relationship between IQ and, say, academic performance or long-term life income is higher than that reported in all but about 5% of psychology studies. Okay so here's an interesting--you might say, again, in order to determine that something exists, you have to be able to measure it and then it has to be good for something. So it has to be grippable and it has to be useable as a tool, we'll say for the sake of argument. What sort of IQ do you need for what kind of job? This was derived from a company called Wonderlic, and Wonderlic does employment testing. Psychologists usually don't use the Wonderlic test. It's a relatively short IQ test, and it's a good test. I think psychologists don't use it because it was developed commercially, but we tested the Wonderlic out a lot and it has excellent psychometric properties. It's a very good IQ test. It probably errs a little bit in testing crystallized IQ rather than fluid IQ, but we won't argue about that for the time being. Alright so, if you have an IQ from 116 to 130, that puts you in the 86th to 95th percentile. Right, so that means you're minimally--if there were 8 people in a room, on average you'd be the smartest person. I should tell you, just so you know, that if you're a state college student--we'll use the US as an example because there's more differentiation between the American universities in terms of quality than there is the Canadian universities--if you're in an average American post-secondary institution, your IQ is 115. And so, you think, that's not all that bright. But that's brighter than 7 out of 8 people in the general population. And so the are as many people--if you look at the North American distribution...so you have the 50th percentile in the middle of the normal distribution, you have the 85th percentile here, and you have the 15th percentile here. So about 70% of people fall between the 15th and the 85th percentile. At the 15th percentile you're not really very literate. And so what that means is that in the United States there's just as many people who aren't literate as there are people who are in college. And what I would mean by literate is not so much--like here's a bare bones definition of literate: you can follow written instructions. And so what that means is it's kind of a two-fold issue, right. You can make out the words and the phrases and the sentences, but then you can translate them into actual action--you can use them as information. And at 85 you're going to have not a very good time doing that. And so, when you're wondering things about the way society is structured and why people don't necessarily make the most intellectually sophisticated choices, one thing that's very much worth remembering is that there's just as many people who are functionally illiterate in north America as there are people who are in tier-one colleges. It's quite shocking. Anyways, okay so you want to be an attorney, a research analyst, an editor, an advertising manager, a chemist, an engineer, an executive, a systems analyst, an auditor--so you're up in the professional levels there. You need an IQ of at least 116. And so 130 would be better. My suspicions are that the average IQ of people in this room is about 120 to 125. It might be a little higher than that. It's hard to measure IQ in the U of T population because a lot of people have English as a second language and so that makes it harder to measure crystallized intelligence obviously using an English language test. But we've found, when we've done our studies at the U of T, that the average exceeds 120. So, you know, so you guys have the cognitive power to basically pursue professional level careers. From 110 to 115: manager, supervisor, programmer, teacher, general manager, purchasing agent, registered nurse, sales account executive. These are actually empirically derived, by the way. So the Wonderlic company has tested a very large number of people. And so these are the actual averages of the professions that they are describing--it's not hypothetical. 103 to 108, so that's the 60 to the 70th percentile: clerk, customer service rep, computer operator, medical debt collector, secretary, accounting clerk, general sales, telephone sales, assistant manager, credit clerk, drafter, designer, bookkeeper. There's a lot of white-collar, like low level, entry level, white collar jobs in that particular category. So that would be the brighter people among the high school students who didn't go to college and university. IQ, this is dead average, 50th to the 55th percentile: police officer, receptionist, cashier, general clerical staff, inside sales clerk, meter reader, printer, teller, data entry, electrical, helper, dispatcher, general office. So that's right at 100. 95 to 98, so that's the 42nd to the 45th percentile: quality control checker, claims clerk, security guard or unskilled labourer. So look, the unskilled labourers are up at 95th of 98, so that's--at the unskilled labour level you still have an IQ that's higher than 40% of the population. Ark welder, die setter, mechanic, medical dental assistant. IQ 87 to 93: messenger, factory production worker, assembler, food service worker, nurse's aid, warehouseman, custodian, janitor, material handler, and packer. Okay, so now what you see happening--it looks to me like you can conceptualize jobs most simply with a two by two matrix. Okay, so there's managerial/administrative jobs and creative jobs--that's the first one--and then there's low complexity/high complexity. And so, what you're starting to fall into at the 21st to the 37th percentile--so that's still one person in three--are low complexity, managerial jobs. And so what I mean by that is, if you're in a low complexity job, imagine you're responsible for 30 things. But roughly speaking, it's the same 30 things all the time. And roughly speaking, they have to be taken care of the same way each time. So you have a finite domain of responsibility and you can master it. And IQ will predict how fast you master it, but once you master it, it won't predict how well you do. What happens then, in all likelihood, is that conscientiousness starts to predict, or maybe emotional stability starts to predict, or some of the other personality factors start to become more important. So, but at 87 to 93, you're down at the level of custodian and janitor. And then that's that. And that's not so good because you have the bottom 15-20% of the population who don't have a cognitive ability at that level. And so one of the things that you're going to hear a lot about as you get older is reasons for unemployment. And one of the prime reasons for unemployment in the future is increasingly going to be that there is just nothing for someone of that level of intelligence to do. And this is partly why people hate IQ, because you think, that is a nasty nasty thing to conclude. Let me tell you a story. So, I had a client at one point who I suspected he had a verbal IQ of about 85 and a non-verbal IQ that was lower. He had other psychological issues, but we'll just concentrate on that one for the time being. And he had a hard time finding a job. He was socially anxious and that didn't help, but even if he could overcome that it was very difficult for him to master the basic skills that were involved in what you would consider even relatively straightforward tasks. I spent a lot of time trying to find him a job, which was insanely difficult. He went to the government first to get help, and they told him to type up his resume on a computer and distribute it--it's like, well that wasn't very helpful because he didn't know how to use a computer and he wasn't going to type up his damn resume. It was, "if you want to get a job, go out and do the things that it would take to get a job." Well yeah, if you can do that then you don't have a problem. And so the government agencies were completely useless, and they were staffed by people who would assume that if you didn't do what you were advised to, then you just didn't want to have a job. Instead of ever thinking that maybe you couldn't do it. It's not the easy to use a computer. And then I tried to get him a volunteer job--well you can bloody well forget about that because it's harder to get a volunteer job than it is to get a real job. And the reason for that is that you have to step through a number of complex bureaucratic hoops, including having a police check. And you know, first of all that's intimidating as hell for people, even if they haven't done anything wrong. And second, it's not that straightforward. It involves manoeuvring through a complicated bureaucracy, and that's not the only step. There's all sorts of other steps. So volunteer work, that's out man. That's just not going to happen, not generally speaking. And then I found him a job helping a guy out who had a bicycle shop/book store--kind of a strange combination--but it was a government subsidized temporary position. And then, he did a good job at it--he was reshelving books and that sort of thing--and so he was reliable. He could do that. But, you know, the subsidy program ended and of course, if you run a bike shop/book store it's not like you have additional money to hire someone because, that's a store that's just not going to be generating maybe any income, but certainly not enough to hire someone. So that fell apart. Then I made a bunch of personal contacts with charity organizations to see if I could get him a volunteer position. I finally got him a volunteer position. And then I went with him to train at the volunteer position, and that was so enlightening. So what he had to do was, he had a stack of pieces of paper here and then a stack of envelopes here, and in principle the pieces of paper--which were letters--were in the same order as the envelopes were. And so what he had to do was fold the pieces of paper three times and stuff the folded piece of paper into the envelope and the seal the envelope and then put it here. But it was a bit more complicated than that because sometimes the letters were in French and sometimes they were in English, so what that meant was that he had to watch and see that the French envelopes went into this stack and the English envelopes went into that stack. So that's one degree of complexity, right. But then it also turned out that those damned envelopes had to be run through an automatic letter sorting machine. Now you might think, well that doesn't matter, but it does matter because those things have very tightly defined tolerances. And if you make a mistake--imagine you fold a piece of paper and the first time you fold it you made a mistake of an eighth of an inch. And then the next time you fold it you make another eighth of an inch mistake. That means your piece of paper is now one quarter inch out of truth. And then you stuff it in the envelope and fold it, but then you crinkle the envelope. And so then the envelope gets stuck in the automatic processing machine. So I taught him probably 20 hours, how to fold this piece of paper into three. You know, and he was a bit shaky, and he just didn't have the fine motor ability or the cognitive ability to do that. And then--I'll end with this--when he finally couldn't do it anymore, what happened was the letters came with photographs attached to them. And then he had to fold the pieces of paper around the photographs in a way that didn't crumple the photographs so that they could still fit into the envelopes. And each photo was stapled, maybe half an inch different, per piece of paper. So then he had to fold them properly with a different folding technique for every piece of paper, and he had to sort them into French and English, and then also if the envelopes and the papers ever got out of sync--which they did now and then--he had to figure out how to sort the envelopes and the pieces of paper to make sure that they were matched with the proper envelope. It was like, no. That was the end of it. And so I'll tell you the rest of this story later. So anyways, the moral of the story is if you're smart, you're privileged and, thank god, make use of it. And if you're on the low end of the IQ distribution, man, you've got one tough life ahead of you. It has nothing to do with willingness to work, or virtually nothing. And it's a good thing to know, even though it's horrible.
